1st)
	בעולת בהמה שאינה אוכלת אלא באבות בעליו נאמר והקרב והכראים ירחץ במים והקטיר, בעוף שנזון מן הגזל נאמר והשליך את המעים.
שם יז ד"ה בכנפיו
	והלא אין לך הדיוט שמריח ריח רע של כנפים נשרפים ואין נפשו קצה ממנו ולמה נאמר הכתוב והקטיר? כדי שיהא המזבח שבע ומהודר בקרבנו של עני.
A נ"ב: It is כדאי to have personal discomfort to make someone else happy, but not if it means lowering even the highest of moral standards.

2nd)
In Lekuti Torah parshas Devorim, א,א the Alter Rebbe quotes the מאמר רז"ל "With whom did He consult? With the neshamos of the tzadikkim" and adds "and not only tzadikim, rather as it is written 'and your nation is entirely righteous'".
When he says "and not only tzadikim", he seems to be making a distinction between real tzadikkim and another level. "Not only real tzadikkim, but also this additional group of 'your all really great guys'". (This would contrast with "and this includes all of כלל ישראל , as it is written..."

To understand this יש להקדים what the Mittler Rebbe writes in the begining of דרך חיים. 
	"Every one says 'The soul that you have given me is pure' - certainly we can't say this (idea of purity) on the soul that is in the body, because 'There is no צדיק in the land' (koheles ז,כ), and how can we say 'it is pure' completely? In regards to the higher portion of the soul which is not enclothed in the body - on this we can say 'it is pure' even now
	"And what we say 'you created' - this is referring to the part of the soul which is in the body, חכמה and בינה in the מוח, and מדות  in the heart, etc, into which can fall blemishes with his sins."

Based on this we can say that we are, in fact, discussing two different kinds of Tzadik. The first is even a Tzaddik מצד the part of his soul which is enclothed within his body, while the second is the idea that every Jew is a tzadik מצד the part of his soul that is beyond being inside the body and is not effected by what goes on down here. And there is actually a certain greatness specifically in this level, because however great a tzadik is and how much he refines himself, the soul is always bigger then the body, and not everything will be able to come inside. By the 'and your nation is entirely righteous' type of Jew, this greater level is perfection is more בולט, because thats all he has.

So...what is the הוראה in עבודת ה?
We all want to have all of the good things, the truly good things - נחת from our children, שלום בית, time to learn Torah and Daven, tons of money so we don't have to worry about the small stuff, etc. Hashem is the one who gives us all of these things. So we want to be able to daven, to say what we need, and get it מיד, and lots of it. But "With whom did He consult? With the neshamos of the tzadikkim." Specifically a tzadik can decree, and Hashem will say "Takeh, thats a good idea." Now really every Jew should be able to do this, because 'your nation is entirely righteous'. But this is only מצד the part of the soul which is beyond the body. So in order to be פועל all the good things, we have to connect to this higher part of the soul.
How do we do this?

The Mittler Rebbe writes, shortly after the previously quoted passage,
	"It is known that these two parts of the soul can be compared to a rope, that the beginning is held for high up and the end is held in the deepest depths. Similarly (it is written) "Yaakov, a rope is his inheritance" - the first end is the portion of the soul above, which is held and connected with the source from where it is hewn, באלקים חיים, and the other end is enclothed in the physical body, in the brain and heart
	"...When we down here are awakened to תשובה from preperation of our heart, this awakens above an אתארותא דלעילא to awaken the love from above to below, like the analogy of the bottom of a rope shaking, which causes the top portion to shake."

Over here we see a connection between the two souls, and this connection being tapped into through תשובה. It is brought down over there specifically in regards to love of Hashem, but perhaps we can extend it based on we said earlier. When a Jew does תשובה, and as is explained in the second מאמר אני לדודי that תשובה is not on only for sins, rather also to "return to his first path", an ultimate degree of perfection, this gets him in touch with the higher part of his soul, the tzadik part of himself. And at that point he can start asking for all of his needs, and "With whom did He consult? With the neshamos of the tzadikkim", and Hashem will say "Takeh, thats a good idea", with the coming of משיח, speedily in our days, אמן.

3rd)
Avraham sent Eisav to trap a deer. Sara sends yitzchak to shecht a sheep. How could it be that Avraham could confuse a sheep with a deer? It must be that he was a chasidishe yid, and a chasidishe yid can't tell the difference between sheep and deer. Deer, sheep, duch, chicken, gefilte fish - whatever, its food. (And if you'll ask, that rashi explains that deer and sheep taste the same - so he was also a chasidishe yid!).
So why did Avraham send Yitzchak to get davka venison?
l'havin zeh yesh l'hakdim - why do people buy fancy wine for shabos and yomtov if everyone knows that they tast the same? L'kovod the holy day! Similarly, Avraham asked specifaly for deer meat l'kovod the bracha.
And the hora'a b'avodas Hashem: Maasa Avos siman l'bonim. We have to realize where we come from, and realize our culinary shortcomings, and not make the same mistake as R.X. who, on the first night that his newly married wife made dinner for him and asked him an hour later what was for dinner, he couldn't remember. And the next day the same thing happened again, and his Rebbetzin asked him "was it milchigs or fleishigs?" and he didn't know!
So we should bear in mind this inyan, and when our wives make dinner for us we should be careful to write down what it was so that if they ask us later we can tell them, and then we'll merit to have a house overflowing with children and torah and mitzvos and simcha l'hayvee to bee'as goel tzedek, v'hu yigalenu, tekaf u'meyad, mamash.

4th)
The most common question on chabad ( in polite company) is “why do you not learned other chasidus?” So I was pondering this. and I asked my self, “if I was in a room with only polishe chasidus, would I read it or be oyvar Bittul Tora? B’pashtus, I would rather be oyvar. But - this is an issur! and b’pashtus i’ll burn in gehenom for it! which means its against Hashem’s ratzon! So how could I do something which is against Hashem’s ratzon?
We must say that there is pnimiyus haratzon and chitzoniyus haratzon. Mitzad chitzoniyus haratzon - there is a rule, and if you break the rule - youre going to get thwacked. But m’tzad pnimiyus haratzon  - Hashem really doesn’t want you learning poilisheh chasidus. 
So why do poilishe’s learn that stuff? Because they have more of a shaychus to chitzonyos haratzon - bichloluss, they’re chitzon’s -there whole shita is “Tzadik b’emunuso yichey אל תקרי יחיה אלא יחיה” - you don’t have to do your own עבודה, the tzadik will do everything for you and you’ll run off of his batteries.  But chabbad munt pnimyus - so mir tur nisht lernen that stuff. So them - it bothers if they annoy Hashem m’tzad chitzoniyus ratzon, but we don’t care to much - were into pnimyus.
But this only explains why they would learn it if they have no other choice other than bittul torah. Why would they learn it l’chatchilah, when chabad chasidus is so much more awesome? Because ר”ל they האב נישט קיין קאפ, so all they can do is learn poilishe vertlech. 
But א חסיד איז א קלוער - we can learn it, and we do.
And if you'll ask - but really must chabad guys don't understand the chasiduss they are learning - 
It is known the פתגם that "Bresvlev demands simcha, kotzk truth, and chabad bittul - and breslover's are all depressed, kotzkers are all putting on a show, and lubavitchers are baal gaavas."
And this itself is the maalah of chabad, that it enables them to grow in an infinite and unbounded way, through connecting specifically to pnimiyus haratzon, and specifically through this will we bring Moshiach, speedily in our days.

5th) 
Regarding the Yom Yom of 18th of Cheshvan
(For technical reasons, this is to be found at the end of this collection)

6th)
The Mishnah says, מעשרות א,א that "All (produce) that, at the beginning and end (of its development) is eaten (by people under normal conditions) is חייב (in מעשרות) at the beginning and the end, and everything that is not eaten at the beginning but is eaten at the end is not חיייב until it becomes something which is eaten."

Perhaps we can say the meaning of this in עבודת ה. 
The idea of produce is that ה gives to all of us certain abilities, or interests, and from this we derive our sustenance.
Separating Maaser means that a person has to dedicate at least a portion of this to ה. Unless this is done, it is אסור to benefit from them.
Someone who for the first part of his life was not doing this might not feel so great - all the benefit that he had from this in the past he might think he had in prohibition.
But we say that he is only chayuv in maaser when it is fit to be eaten by a person.
The loftiest appellation for a person in Hebrew is אדם, from אדמה לעליון, similar to the supernal. This similarity is specifically with our G-dly soul. When we say that a person is "similar to the supernal" we mean that his G-dly soul is revealed within him. The vehicle for this is Torah, who's 613 commandments correspond to the 613 faculties of the soul. When someone is learning תורה and doing מצוות, he has at least a minimal connection to this concept of being an אדם. (Ulihayeer, that someone who's doing good things and some really nasty things isn't necessarily holding at the level of אדם.)
To be ראוי למאכל אדם (eatable by a person) is that these abilities etc. are being used by someone who has some sort of a connection to the level of אדם.
And the mishna says that if the produce was not eatable to a person when he was in a lower state of development - it is not חייב in maaser.
So a person shouldn't give up hope or be discouraged - ה doesn't ask the impossible. When he was smaller, his produce wasn't edible to a person, and potur.

7th)
B'inyan "cholent powered rockets will take us to the moon" (Country Yosi)
moon - "light of moon like sun" hints on ימות המשיח, cholent = on שבת, shabbos is מעין דלעתיד, that physical becomes holy, cholent, the ultimate of physical thickness with meat and beans and potatoes on שבת is the ultimate גלוי of משיח, and will "take us to the moon", to yemos hamashiach, speedily in our days, אמן.

8th)
Likutei Sichos, chelek א, vayishlach, אות י (loose translation)
	"The ענין of riding a donkey is that through this a person can reach a place he couldn't have reached otherwise, whether because the place was too far or too high.
	"Similarly in רוחניות - Through refining the chumriyus and physical the neshama can come to a level that it couldn't have reached otherwise."

This is to say - a donkey is going to a certain place, and through a person's riding the donkey he can also go to that place.
Similarly, through the physical becoming less coarse (איידל), through its going to a good place, this taps into something beyond what the soul can reach through its avodah, and it can ride the donkey to greater hights.

Ibid, אות י"א (loose translation)
	"In the days of Avraham, the beginning of the avoda of making stuff holy, the physical coulnd't raise the person himself higher, because the physical itself wasn't made holy, as is explained in many places that there was a decree that the spiritual couldn't go down into the physical and the physical couldn't go up to the spiritual."

That is to say - you can only ride the donkey if its going somewhere, likewise the physical can only lift up the soul if the physical is less coarse (איידל). In the days of Avhraham - he couldn't ride the donkey, the physical couldn't lift him up to a higher spiritual level, because it wasn't going anywhere, it wasn't going towards holiness. It couldn't, because of the decree.

Ibid
	"It could only effect the things which help - the wood and מאכלת. Which, through the refining (בירור) of the physical, they (the wood etc) become at that time a helper to holiness."

This is to say - what can the coarse physical help? It can help the likewise coarse physical, which is designated to be used in refining the physical. The physical even at the time of the decree had a holy vitality which could be used, the problem being that the physical itself remained completely unaffected.  This process of using that holiness is called "refining"(בירור), taking that little bit of desired stuff.
So - to bring the holy to a better place the donkey, the physical, couldn't do, because it couldn't travel in that dimension. But it could help physical, non-holy stuff, which only later were used to help a holy avoda, עבודת הבירורים.

9th)
Torah Or Miketz, לב,ד
"...and every time the neshama ascends it must go through the river of fire to מבטל its previous understanding, becuase the previous understanding can not be compared to the current, and it is completely nullified to it. This is because these ideas are to grasp the ray of the אא"ס ב"ה  - being that this is the case, every additional idea that is grasped, the lower understanding is בטול compared to it."

Why does one extra idea make a difference, to the point that the lack thereof is botul, and not only that but you need to go through the river of fire?
Perhaps we can answer: For a wisdom of no value, if I know a little bit more it doesn't make a difference. And even if I know a lot more then you, and this makes a very big impression on people - it truth that also doesn't make a difference. But when you're talking about every idea giving you a deeper relationship with the infinite creator, even the smallest added awareness makes an enourmous diffrence, to point that etc כנ"ל.

10th)
I thought of this as I was walking back, on rechov ari. I have another vague idea that I might try to develop, if you want, but I don't have כח  now - this was hard work! If you want to publish it, feel free to do whatever you want with the contents, change anything, add, etc, and you can publish it in whatever name you want, yours, mine, anonyous, חידושי הריב"א, a class mate, a made up name - whatever you want. (early) Happy Purim!
מגלת אסתר, א,יב
"ותמאן המלכה ושתי"
It is known that in chasidus feminine is a moshul for the midah of malchus, of מקבל, and in particular a queen. 
What was Queen Vashti? Vashti was someone who still needed to improve and grow a little bit. 
In a deeper way we can say that Queen Vashti is malchus as it is expressed in a תלמיד. (And as the Mittler Rebbe in  שער היחוד פרק מז, beggining of the second page, שו"ה ז"א כו {shura hamascheles, this is seen often in the notes on the bottom of Torah Or and Likeuti Torah}  quotes from the zohar, "אזעירת גרמה", that at the beginning of the complex process of malchus recieving from the other sefirot it exists in a small state.)
What does Vashti do? ותמאן - the king asks her to do something silly, and she refuses! And from this came the גאולה of the Jewish people! ידוע לכל that מרידה במלכות is חייב מיתה, and certainly vashti, the daughter of royalty and very well versed in polotics, knew this also. And, despite this, she was מוסר נפש for כלל ישראל! 
(l'ha'ir, vashti wasn't the greatest tzadik. Ul'ha'ir from what the Rebbe explains in  לקו"ש חלק א פ' וישב אות ז that if a goy is disturbing a Jew's davening, this is in order that he should work even harder to ignore him, and have even more כוונה than he had originally, and this is because the source of everything, if you go back far enough, is קדושה, and this שורש wants to do good things. But because the tool he's working with is a goy, it comes out in a negative way.)
And to continue our ביאור according to חסידות - when a student refuses to do the silly things that his teacher tells him to do, knowing that they are risking getting punished - this will bring the salvation of the Jewish people, with Moshiach צדקנו, speedily in our days, amen!

11th)
ביאור בדרך אפשר על חלקים מפרק כ"ח של ספר התניא
	"From sadness comes out a benefit, the true joy in ה after the true sadness on sins at particular times, which through this is broken the spirit of impurity and the iron curtain between him and ה" {To be replaced with quote}
	A moshul.
	A father has a powerful love for his son, like a fast flowing river which pulverizes obstructions to its journey, which is so full of power that the obstacle, whatever it might be, is not even noticed. This love is constant, and there is nothing that can weaken it.
	But there is another aspect to the relationship of a father to his son. Every father has things which he expects and asks of his son. For example, a father wants his son to try hard in school, pay attention and be respectful to his teachers. Then there are the things which he doesn't want him to do or to be involved with. For example, he doesn't want him to fight with his siblings, or be connected to negative influences within his class.
	The relationship between the father and the son when the son is following the wishes of his father is very understood. When things go wrong, though, things get much more complex. There are several points which, although they (hopefully) are things which we know to be true from our own experience (this of course being the whole point of a moshul) have to be brought out. These points will (בעזרת ה) give us a more real understanding of the words of the Alter Rebbe.
	The first and most important thing to point out in the relationship of the to father to his son is that the incredible love is not weakened in even the slightest degree by any thing that his son does, no exceptions. 
	This reality coexists with the fact that there very clearly is a distance created between the father and the son by the son's actions.
	Even after the son again begins acting in a proper manner as before, this distance still exists, even though it is ignored to a large degree. The father is happy that the son has returned to be close to him in a revealed way, but the pain of what he did is still there. The revelation of the father's love is hindered.
	When the father knows that the son feels pain over what he did, this removes the seperation.
	Which leads to a very interesting point in the son's trying to connect to his father even while the seperation is still there: the good things that he does has to be with joy, and the son's trying to realize and feel that what he has done is bad has to be limited to particular times.
	(tzurich iyun)

13th)
This וא"כ has troubled me for a very long time. Perhaps this is a valid explanation.
וא"כ מובן ממילא שבחי' מדת העצמיו' דכח"ב וחג"ת ונהי"ם ההיולים שבעצמיו' הנפש לא יתכן לומר גם לשון זה שמתאחדי' וכלולים בעצמיו' הנפש הנק' יחידה מאחר שאינן נבדלים מן העצם כלל
We feel within ourselves that we are not a composite of assorted intellectual and emotional abilities; rather, "I am I", simple and unified. But how could this be when there comes from us such an infinite variaty of stuff?
Untill now we have explained that despite all the stuff that comes from them, the essential attributes of חסד, גבורה, etc are completely simple. Being that this is the case, we can see how it could be that these simplicities can coexist within the essence without contradicting its simple unity, or like we said earlier "If so that being kind doesn't mean haveing all these details actually there, rather just a simple part of identity, of who you are, etc."
There isn't stuff of chesed and gevura - its all just a flavor of me. Which we could not have clearly understood before the demonstaration of the simplicity of the abilities. Before, there is a very marked diffrence between them.
 ... ע"ד דוגמא כח התנוע' שנכלל ממש בעצם החי קודם שמניעו לגמרי שאינו נבדל מן העצם כלל
This is understood from the power of movement, that the power of movement is not seperate from the thing of being alive. Being alive means being able to move (there are exceptions, but אכ"מ). "Dead dogs don't bark." Its not a seperate thing.
 אעפ"י שבגלוי כח התנוע' להניע דבר פרט יתחלק לכמה פרטי אופנים א"א לומר שכל אופני פרטי התנוע' כלולי' ומתאחדי' היו כשהי' כח התנוע' נכלל בעצם החי מאחר שאז לא הי' בסוג וגדר תנוע' כלל לא בכלל ולא בפרט כו'
We have the same problem with the power of movement that we have with the ספירות - there's so many movements that a person can make, how can the power they come from be a simple thing thats included in an automatic way within the essential thing of being alive?
The answer is the same (as the one which enabled the וא"כ): All these different things aren't there at all, וכנ"ל באריכות.
 וכן בחי' גילוי התפשטות החיות להחיות כל הגוף בעודנ' כלול לגמרי בעצם רוח החיים הגם שבגלויו מתחלק לראי' ושמיע' לעין ואוזן וכה"ג שבודאי גם טרם בואו להתגשם בעין ואוזן בפועל הי' כלול בו חיות הראי' הרוחני' לעין בפ"ע וחיות השמיע' באוזן בפ"ע מ"מ קודם שבא' עצם הנפש לכלל בחי' התפשטות החיות גם שכלול בה ה"ז כהתכללות כח התנוע' בעצם החי הנ"ל
The power of movement is just one power. From there the Mittler Rebbe goes to all the physical abilities, that all of them are included within the soul in the same way. Which brings us back to the ספירות, and how they are all included in the עצם.
