Intro to Shaar Hayichud

Part 1
Why is it important to learn this stuff? Because we're just before Geulah, and chasidus is the כלי for this. Deeper: the whole inyan of Moshiach is chasidus.
Two {perhaps primary} difficulties: it's hard to see the organozation of the different concepts explained in chasidus, and it's hard to apply these ideas into avoda.
For both of these two things, for haskallah and avodah, you need to have a detailed understanding.
Shaar hayichud is for this.
A mayluh of this sefer is that it gives all of the inyanim equal attention; it doesn't go in great detail about what inyan and gloss over the next.
This explanation will start at chapter 10. Why? Really the first part is the main thing, but because many people don't know enough to work with those chapters, the Mittler Rebbe gives that missing knowlage to you.
But that first part is hard to understand and impossible to apply without the second part.

Part 2
The first 9 chapters are a continuation from kuntrus ha'hisipaylus.
Kuntras ha'hispaylus was written soon after the Alter Rebbe past away.
He talks about problems chasidim had applying chadius to avoda.
There were two main mistaken schools of though:
1) chasidus is intelect and hispaylus bad
2) hispaylus is great - but how does chasidus have anything to do with that?
Wrote the kuntrus, explains the diffrent types of hispaylus, levels of souls, mistakes, etc.
Conclusion: a true hispaylus is from hisbonenus, it doesn't come from focusing on your self and trying to generate a feeling towards Hashem. Like if someone wins a lottery, he's excited from thinking about money, not from thinking and planning exactly how excited he should probably be considering that he just became the owner of a ridiculously large amount of money.
It shouldn't be a persons goal to reach the highest level of hispaylus, his hope should be that he has a true hispaylus, on whatever level he merits. For that, you have to understand {and be misbonen on that understanding}, and then automatically you'll have the hispaylus.
Shaar Hayichud follows that up, explaining what hisbonenus is and what subject matter it's supposed to be dealing with.
Hisbonenus means iyun, making yourself understand. It is not "concentration", ie haamukas hadaas {- even though you do need that also. If you aren't deeply connected to the subject/the hisbonenus it's not going to work out so well.}

Part 3
People think that you have to empty your mind of busy activity, eg analytical though, and unstead either concentrate on nothing or on something silly like the flame of a candle or letters of the aleph beis, and that will lead you to have a flash of insight into the spiritual.
That's crazy! Your going to get medical knowlage by meditating on a textbook in lotus position?
You need iyun, ie deep study.
Hisbonenus opens up the soul, from top to botem - up to keser(mesiras nefesh) and down to emotions and actions(tora and mitzvos)
The Alter teaches in Tanya that the best/only benoni comes to that level through hisbonenus. This is in sharp contrast to a bar mitzva bochur who decides, "I'm gonna be perfect". That usually lasts like 10 seconds.
But with hisbonenus things change. You realize that some things are good, some are bad, and bad is takeh bad, and this realazation is strong enough that it is even able to effect you later, at a time when you aren't conciously thinking about it.
It's important to remember why we're learning all this seder hishtalshelus stuff. It's to see achdus Hashem in the world.
The whole process is really transparent. It doesn't conceal, it doesn't block G-d from us.
For example a phone call. We say we're talking to each other, even though there's a ton of stuff in between!

Part 4
Even though what you really want is the general point, eg "Hashem is everything", but you need all the details to bring you there.
Eg doctor or rav - it's not enough to have a general knowlage, they need to know all the details.
Also to be chasid - to use it, to change and to see the world differently, you need details. If someone only has a general knowlage, they'll just fool themselves into thinking that they're holding on some sort of a high spiritual level when they really aren't,
Some points about the style of explanation in this sefer:
1) It talks about the way these ideas are found in a person. This is for two reasons. 
	A) "A person is a small world", we are a perfect analogy for the bigger world.
 	B) We understand how people work. {Or at least, if you hit us over the head with an explanation, we're more likely to be able to understand our own subtle inner workings then something else.}
So there are two main moshuls from person.
	A) How the soul comes into body. Iyov: "From my flesh I see G-d". The classic explanation of this statement is "Just like the soul fills the body, so does Hashem fill the world."
	B) Letters. Eg language, different levels of meaning. {Or the letters that the soul uses to communicate within itself, which exist even on the most subconcious and ephemeral level, as will be explained towards the end of Shaar Hayichud.}
2) The Mittler Rebbe explains the hishtalshelus from top to bottem. There aren't any questions, no explanations on the parsha, etc.
3) Quotes the source (etz chaim etc), then gives meshal, then nimshal. If the start of a section scares you, relax. Help is on the way.

Learning a concept here is a diffrent experiance then when you see it in other places.

It's called "The key to chasidus." Some explain this as reffering to the key on a map.
If someone learns this, it opens up the other sifrei chasidus.
In a way, learning this sefer isn't the ultimate goal, rather it opens up the rest of chasidus.


Shaar Blat (cover page 1)
L'haskil U'luhaven
{I'm not sure what this means exactly, here's two possiblities:} {The explanations needed in order to understand} {Or: ...in order to understand}
L'fi ha'vanas libo
{However much he can, according to how smart he is.}
אם תדרשנו
 Look and see. Like in hakdama to shaar emuna - when the father hides, the son should look and follow footsteps, then Hashem won't hide.
v'im
And if not, you won't find Hashem.
ותוכן לבות...בכל לבי 
sincerity
דרישה...בעין השכל שבלב
The understanding of the heart? What does that mean? The inyan is that on the one hand, we do want to have, and will have, an actual understanding. But bina liba - the real understanding is the intuituve perception from his neshama that he acceses through learning chasidus. This is a big diffrence between a terrestial, human developed wisdom and a G-dly wisdom, like chasidus. The neshama already knows chasidus, what we have to do is make the mind aware.
מקרב...ולב עמוק
Amuk - the Alter Rebbe uses these words in the context of describing golus, on the personal level and on the global level. When {the understanding is} fake, you're in golus. Ge'ulah is when his understanding is מקרב כו'.


Hakdama (cover page 2)

מהות יקונטרוס הלז מדבר בענין היחוד אלקות בכל פרט ופרט בסדר ההשתלשלות דע"ס דאבי"ע והוא קיצור
summary, or explanation in short.
 מכל אשר יוכל איש לקר'5 אל השכל
This is something that he has from his nefesh haelokis, but now he's bringing it to his sechel, such that the mind and heart can grasp it.
 בהשגה מלובשת ונתפסת במוח ולב בכל פרטי סדר ההשתלשלות מצמצום הראשון 
and really a bit before, to understand what is being m'tzamtzem.
עד סוף עולם העשיה והוא הנק' בשם קונטרס ההתבוננות שרבים משתוקקים שיובא בדפוס כי רבו בו הטעות מאד בהעתקות שונות ומובטחני מאד שיקובל לרצון לפני ה' כונתי הרצוי' לטובת כל איש דורש אלקים באמת ובתמים 
B'emes ub'tumim - this is a common part of the Mittler Rebbe's introductions to his seforim.
וידינוני לזכות בכל אשר לא יוכשר בעיני חכמים וכמ"ש שגיאות6 כו'
The Mittler Rebbe will make mistakes in chasidus? This could be a refrence to A) Printing mistakes. B) Maybe he'll explain too much or too little, which could cause problems with kitrugim from above. For example his imprisonment, and the imprisonment of his father, the Alter Rebbe. C) {Maybe it won't be too much viza vi Heavenly regulations concerning the disemination of Divine wisdom, but it might be} too much for the mekabel D) The simplest explanation is that the Mittler Rebbe is known as an anav, and therefor this is something seen in many of his introductions.
 וה' ירים קרן ישראל ויאיר עיניהם באור ה' אור עולם בחן וחסד ורחמים בחיי הנשמה וחיי הגוף וינטלם וינשאם 
carry them and protect them
כל ימי עולם7 עד ביאת הגואל
