Chapter 21


Part 1
Last perek tohu and tikkun. Now gets into the gimel kavin, three lines, partuf.
(כא) ובזה יובן כללות ענין התכללות דג' קוין דנאצלי' חח"ן מימין ובג"ה משמאל ודת"י22 באמצע כו' כמ"ש בפרד"ס דפנימית הכתר23 הנק' כתר שבכתר לא נחלק לג' קוין
That's the nekuda we spoke of earlier. 
 בחי' חיצוניו' שבו ממנו מתחלק לג' קוין והוא מבחי' חכמ' שבכתר כו' וכידוע בכונות דהגדול הגבור והנורא24 כו'.
Those are the three kavin within keser. The Hey shows on important, hispashtus, keser.
 וביאור הדברים הנה בחי' התכללות הקוין ימין ושמאל הוא ע"י קו האמצעי דוקא והענין הוא דקו הימין חח"ן הרי החסד ענף החכמה25 ומובדל הימנה והוא מה שנסתעף החסד מצד השכל והטעם שמטה כלפי חסד בדבר מורכב כנ"ל
Kindnes because of a reason, not from the etzem thing that you're a nice guy. Right side of brain, chochma, right hand, chesed. Give with right, hold with left. Chochma connected to chesed: looks to the pnimyus. Get a gift, and it's silly - chochma looks past the chitzonyus, "it's the thought that counts." Bina focuses on the external. A gift never fully captures the inyan that it's trying to express. And also a person's actions - his actions will never be perfect. And that's what bina picks up on.
Chochma: the feeling will never be expressed in the gift, so look past it, apreciate the thought. Bina: but it's supposed to be a meaningul expression of the feeling.
 וכן הנצח ענף החסד26 מובדל הימנו דהיינו מצד החסד יחויב בחי' הניצוח להביא החסד למעשה בפו"מ כו'
	[5:50] Chesed - you want to give. There will be obstacles to overcome. Like teaching - if, because of chesed, you want to give to your student a great chochma - you'll have to struggle to overcome the limitations of the student to get it into his head. Right leg - want to do chesed? You'll run after him to help. Chesed says to even fight to do good.
	But even though all the sfiros in one side, or kav, ChCha"N etc have a leaning, they're detached from each other. So you can have someone with a refined mind who percieves the importance of giving tzadaka because of chochma, but the emotion is less, and when it comes to chasing the poor guy down {Or even just putting his hand in his pocket to get out a dollar} etc - he's barely interested. The chochma demands even then that there be an emotion etc, but - not neccesarily does that actually come out. Mivtzoim - a person can understand the importance, and feel like they want to help, but - to actually do it... they need money, it takes time, it's cold, it's aquard, it's difficult, so you need netzach. The chesed demands that he go on mivtzoim, but the drive to do is seperate, it doesn't follow automatically.
 וקו השמאל היפוכו כמו שכל המטה כלפי דין שנסתעף הימנו מדה"ד כו' כך בינה גבורה כו' כמ"ש אני בינה לי גבורה27 כו' דהחכמ' נוטה לחסדי' ובינה מינה דינין28 כו' (וכמ"ש בע"ח דאבא מקור החסדי'29
abstract, so see the connection between things.
 ואימא מקור כל הגבורו' כו'
analyze, see diffrences, compare and contrast.
 וכידוע)
Reading: being aware of the literal definition of the words is a bina thing, connecting with it to the point that you don't even realize that you're reading is a deeper chochma thing.


Part 2
[ ואימא מקור כל הגבורו' כו'
See's differences, looks at chitzonyus, divides the subject into parts {conceptually}, which will be described later as being a function of the Hey g'vuros m'natzpach {or mantzapach according to the pronunciation of Rabbi Bukiet}.
 וכידוע)]
 ובחי' ההתכללו' דב' קוין הללו שיבואו להתחבר במקום א' הוא ע"י קו האמצעי דת"י כו'
You always have these two ways of dealing with any situation. So how could someone decide? Avrohom saw the inner good, problem was that they were expressing that wrong. That's one derech. Or you could look at the chitzonyus, they're doing bad, who needs them? And both are true, so how could someone decide? Through da'as.
 כמו הדעת שהוא בחי' ממוצע להטות משכל של חסד לשכל של דין ונק' דעת נוטה30
Da'as can take both, and decide what in this situation is the best way to get the potential expressed in the chitzonyus as much as possible. Personal, what you feel is best. A judgement that you have to make, a human, personal thing. Chochma and bina are a technical thing, da'as is personal.
 (וכמו כי יצר לב כו' שנעשה שכל וטעם לזכות אשר תחלה היה זה השכל עצמו נוטה כלפי חוב31 כמ"ש וירא כי רבה רעת כו' וכה"ג וכמ"ש במ"א)
The idea being that any situation could be interpeted in a chesed way or a gvura way, and you have to decide.
 ונמצא בדעת יחובר ב' שכליי' הפכיי' דחו"ג להיות נוטה לחסד באופן זה ולדין באופן זה וכה"ג גם במקום א'
For example, will overlook things wrong that the person does, because inside they're good. But at a certain point you draw a line, and push him to improve himself. So da'as can lean in both directions. Individualized, a personal thing - that's the general idea of the middle line.
 וכך מדת הת"ת מכריע בין חו"ג32 שהוא כמו הרחמי' שאינו אלא אחר מדה"ד שעכ"ז חמנו' פוטרו 
For example, a defendant asks for the mercy of the court. This is specificaly after he's been found guilty. It recognizes that he has good within him, (if there wasn't there couldn't be any possibility of being kind to him) but it's gotten a little bit messed up. So really, because it's gotten a bit messed up, you should technicaly throw the book at him. But recognizing that the real goal is for him to improve, sometimes you look past that. Like a testing system in a school. The goal is to make sure that they're working as hard as they can. If someone is working, but can't keep to that standard, you shouldn't just fail him and chuck him out, even though technically that's the official procedure. So it's a mixture between chesed and gvura, and a human, subjective thing.
והיא מדת יעקב1 כידוע וכן בחי' יסוד ממוצע לכלול ב' הפכים דנו"ה2
Teaching: on the one hand, you want them to learn, so it's tempting just to explain everything to them on a very simple level, and they won't have to work at all. But on the other hand, you want them to work, and grow, and be able to gain independence in the aquisition of ideas. Netzach says give, Hod says slow down, they'll work on they're own.
 שהוא ענין כליות יועצות3 הן ולאו קודם השפעת המשפיע
R.W: In general, chasidus recognizes three parts, inner middle external, for different stuff. Kidney: three parts, in modern terminology only the bottem third is considered the kidney, then on top of it are two adrenal glands. The upper connects to the brain, pituitary, the lower to the emotions, "adreneline rush." Scared, hod, give up, so mesirus nefesh to do anything, nothing to lose. Or testostorone, confident, netzach. The lower filters the blood, good and bad, digestive system.


Part 3
 כשצריך להשפיע עצם המדות חו"ג כו'
Chesed/Gvura says guilty/innocent etc, but now - what to do about it? Need an eitzah. Netzach, active response, hod, reserved, cautios.
וכמו כל שיקול הדעת בא בהכרעה
Whole middle line is about a hachra'a, judgement.
שהן נצח והוד4 איך להביא השפע למקבל כו'
And yesod makes a decision based on those two opposite drives, based on the relationship/connection/sensititivety he has for the mekabel. Like a teacher who's very aware of his student and can taylor his class based on that. Hashgacha protis - a personal connection. Bar da'as - apreciate both sides, make a good final decision.
 והיינו כללות ענין קו האמצעי דת"י שמחבר לב' קוין דימין ושמאל ופרטי התכללותן נק' י"ב גבולי אלכסון5 כידוע 
Two counts. One is 12 edges. 4 on the bottom, 4 on top, and 4 around. The other count: if you draw the three lines of the sfiros, right left middle, There's 7 connecting them vertically, 3 horizontally, and 12 diagonally. The twelve show on hiskallelus. The last two are from bina to netzach and chochma to hod.  
וקו האמצעי נק' בריח התיכון
support beam
6 שמבריח מן הקצה כו'
When you build, you'll always have one or two points where a support is going the whole height of the building. Mishkan: standing walls, a series of upright panels, connected by three poles passing through them top middle and bottem. There was a different top and middle pole for the three sides, the middle one went through all three sides. {Corresponding to the three groups chaga"s etc.} This shows that all the middles are similar - your decision. Da'as your decision in sechel, tiferes in middos, and yesod between netzach and hod. Each level has two poles, and your decision, the middle.
 דהיינו שעולה עד בחי' פנימי' הכתר7
The inner goal, can reach a desicion of what direction to go becuase there's an awareness of where your trying to end up.
 שלמעלה מהתחלקות הקוין 
At this level your in tune with the end, so chesed and gvura aren't inherently important, there a means to an end. Inyan that tikkun is really higher than tohu, it connects to akudim, pnimiyus of tohu, the ultimate goal.
ע"כ יש בכחו לחבר ולכלול ב' הקוין כו'. וביאור ענין פנימית הכתר דנאצלי' שנק' כתר שבכתר (והוא בחי' כתר דע"י וא"א כו') 
The above mentioned nukuda.
היינו בחי' הרצון והתענוג הבא בגלוי שנק' אור הכתר שגם הוא כלול מי"ס ובחי' חכמה שבכתר זהו הטעם לרצון ונק' טעם כמוס לרצון
{Ta'am kamus: chochma of Arich. See chapter 25. Unless chochma of atik is also called ta'am kamus.}
{Meaning of ta'am kamus, concealed reason:} One: covered by the ratzon, even when you have a reason, that's not really why you want it. Two: ta'am, reason, also means taste. That's why you want this, because you find it geshmak. "Why do you want that flavor ice cream?" "It's more choclatey." That's not a reason. Inyan is that you were looking for a particular pleasure, and this is the closest thing to that.
 וכן יש בו חסד ונצח והכל בבחי' הרצון שהוא בלתי מוגבל גם שבא בגלוי מעצם העלם הרצון כנ"ל
A giluy from A"K, so unstead of being the desire for a home, for house. But still unlimited. Now it's a physical, real house, but at this point he wants something he couldn't possible actually have, a crazy mansion, an unlimited desire. Chesed at this level- give without limit.
 וע"כ המדות שברצון ותענוג נק' ימי קדם8 לגבי מדות שבחו"ב שבאים בהגבלה כפי הגבלת השכל הגלוי בלבד כמשי"ת עד בחי' מל' שבכתר 
The old days. Everything bigger than. "In the old days, 8 miles to school, uphill both ways." Admittedly, that's probably not pshat, but the similiarity is interesting.
Kedem: what you really want, before limited to what's actually possible. A"K is called yimei kedem compared to kesser, and kesser is called yimei kedem compared to mochin.
ומבחי' חיצוניות דכתר נחלק לג' קוין מפני שבטעם הכמוס לרצון נק'9[Tz"L nikar, recognized] התחלקות הרצון לחו"ג וממוצע כו'
{Again, N"L poshut that ta'am kamus is chochma of Arich davka. Chochma of atik is one of the gimel raishin, (basicaly) no shaychus to velt.}
Once there's a set image of what you want in the chitzonyus, ta'am - you want things which bring you closer to that, and don't want whatever distances. Or there are things which are more or less of a match to that ta'am. This allows a divison into three kavin in a limited way. At this point of chitonyus ha'keser, the image of what you want is big, huge; but once it's b'geder reality you have something to work with. Wanting a mansion at least shows on some sort of interest in something outside of yourself, at that point you can limit it. I can't get a mansion, so I'll rent a one bedroom apartment. {They cost the same in Crown Heights anyway.} {So ta'am kamus is somewant picky, MaShEi"K keser of arich can find expression in just about anything, as the Mittler Rebbe brings down in a minute from a moshul of a king.} 


Part 4
 אבל בכתר שבכתר שלמעלה מטעם כמוס לרצון עדיין רק רצון פשוט ועצמי
The desire at this level is his whole goal, not a desire that he created as a means to obtain that desire. So {at this level} the desire isn't limited according to other considerations - this is what he wants, and anything less than that he doesn't want. {It's only when the person limits his desire to be on a level of chochma of keser that a level of limitation/compromise between opposing considerations could be obtained, as will be explained in a minute.}
 בלא טעם כלל כי אין טעם לרצון כלל10
Example: let's say that a desire for money is an etzem desire. Then in the external levels of the ratzon, intellect etc, you start making a form how you can get that. And even if it's an impossible plan, because it comes into reality, that means that there's a realazation that his desire might be obtained in a less than perfect way {As I'll give an attempted explanation in a minute}.
 גם לא טעם כמוס כענין שתוק כך עלה במח'11 כו' וכמ"ש במ"א
That was the thing that he wanted. If it was just a means to an end, there could be an inyan of limiting the desire, compromise {maybe a paper cut unstead of death}. But not if it's an etzem ratzon. Like chok, para adumah. Rebbe: The reason the one making pure becomes tamai is understood, yeridah l'tzorech aliya, that's how the world works. If your going to make profit, you have to invest. Clean sink - get dirty. The chok is why Hashem had to make creation in such a way, that we would need a yeridah.
 ע"כ הוא למעלה מהתחלקות ימין ושמאל כו' הגם שבא בגלוי מבחי' האחרונה שבהעלם הרצון דבחי' א"ק (כנ"ל בסוף אות י"ט)
By the time someone gets to a desire for money, that means A"K already turned a deep inner desire into a desire for prosperity. {This follows} a division to kavin! {As we explained earlier, that A"K is reasonable, keser is actually limited according to the dictates of sechel, etc, untill middos bend over backwords to fit into malchus, the external definition of what kind of a person he wants to be. This whole sequence of limitation is a perfect example of 3 kavin, partzuf (albeit in a general way). So how could it be that something revealed from that...won't have 3 kavin?} Rather, relative to iggulim A"K ends up with kavin, says what you should want. But then in Atzilus the etzem becomes connected with that limited Atzilus ratzon, and that ratzon aquires the full non-negotiable force of the etzem. {kewl.} Shtus - this little avaira isn't connected to Hashem. But if a jew realizes that everything is noge'ah, the full force of his mesirus nefesh will be awakened even for the smallest little mitzva.
 ועז"א והבדילה הפרוכת בין הקדש12 כו' בחי' פרסא שבין כתר דכתר לחכמה כו' והוא בחי' קרומא דאוירא13
Arachnoid, membrain of air in the brain.
 כמ"ש במ"א באריכות 
We'll get into it in parek 25, when we get into hair etc. Liquid under skull, (pretty sure its called) subdoral fluid, that gives taanug and ratzon. Spongey thing, kruma d'avira, seperates from brain, hair like tubes in between, goes through to one small part of brain, stimulates that. And on back of spine gives ta'anug. Different people have different shaped krums, depending on that is there nature, that they enjoy kindness and not bina, etc. Maazolos which are explained in perek 25. Kruma - connects etzem ratzon to a particular form. 
וע"כ או' יהי רצון מלפניך14 מלפני הפרסא כו'
Before it was given a form, it could come out in any form. But after the parsa, what a person wants will have a certain form, depending on the parsa, kana"l, which can't be changed so much.
 לשנות מרצון של דין לרצון של חסד וכה"ג כו' וד"ל: