Chapter 19


Part 1
והנה מעתה יש להבין בשרש ע"ס הנאצלי' ששרשם מבחי' מל' דא"ק כמ"ש בע"ח בשער הכללים4 דמבחי' מל' דא"ק נעשה כתר דע"י כו'
Every world has lights, iggulim (~), and a body, a yosher, and from the body of the higher comes the light of the lower. And it continues, getting more and more defined.
First, a desire for a home, which is really a desire to have a particular feeling Kana"l, becomes a desire for a house. But that desire for a house is still abstract compared to the particular image of the kind of house he's looking for, {what kind and if it should have a} kitchen, fireplace, etc. First, this particular image comes up as a fantastic dream house. What does he really want, what would perfectly capture his desire? Then he has to think about what he can actually get. Then how to get it. Untill - "What do I have to do right now?"
In general, there are three stages which are gone through twice, first to figure out what you want, then how to get it.
How to get it: moshul from building a house: Briyah - what are the parts of a house, windows door wall etc. Yetzira - what do I make these things out of? Wood, metal, {labor, particular techniqes?} etc. Asiya - how to make that actually happen.
To figure out "what do I want" has same three levels, on a more general level.  Briyah d'klullis, A"K, is the decision of what stuff will make me happy. {The next two levels will be explained later.}
Sicha - "in the name of liberty they don't teach children about morality, because of seperation of Church and State." This is a problem because to build you have to start from the foundation. In this case, the foundation is religion, which sets the ultimate goal. As we see in A"K {, in the way a person percieves himself, ie his goal of what/who he wants to become}, that a change there causes changes throughout the entire hishtalshelus. {K'poshut, that a person will change drasticly if he sees himself as a foot loose rebel unstead of as an ambitous student.} Without this goal, how could anything be decided, either on a personal or national level? There's no way of saying that one course of action is any better than another. 

[~8:30]
 והנה תחלה יש להקדי' בענין ע"ס הגנוזו' בהעלם איך שיוצאי' לידי גלוי
Two general ways that stuff is revealed in the hishtalshelus, etzem v'hispashtus and what this chapter is about, giluy ha'helem. Here is specificaly A"K to Atzilus, but really whenever you go from the yosher of one world to the iggulim of the next, it's a giluy ha'helem.
 שזהו מ"ש קורא הדורות מראש מראש דא"ק5 כו'
The generations are what'll happen. So A"K is the general image of what is supposed to happen, and Hashem calls out a particular generation to be revealed. "Ok, now its your turn to come out." And then a generation passes - "Now its your turn."
 וא' בס"י שזהו כשלהבת הקשורה בגחלת6
That the fire was there the whole time, only that it was hidden, and now it's being revealed.
 וכה"ג יש דמיונות רבים


Part 2	{I don't feel this shiur was clear enough.}
 ויובן יותר מי' כחות הנפש דהנה ידוע ענין העלם וגלוי אינו כהתפשטות כח מן העצם7 כמו כח הפועל שמתפשט בפעולה שזהו מהות8 כח העצם שנק' עו"ע
To throw something takes effort. 
{Which is a sign that the acting force is itself actively involved in the action. For example someone who's b'etzem a really special person. As soon as he walks into the room, the room lights up, and holy things just fall off of him without effort, becuase that's who he is. Compared to a guy who's trying to become such a person, but for now, to a large degree, isn't such a person b'etzem, only externally. For a holy atmosphere to come from him requires effort. It isn't automatic either for the mashpia or the m'kabel. He has to work to express good things, and its not automatically taken in by the recipient, as it is known "words from the heart enter the heart", "dvarim hayotzim min ha'lev vchulo".
For both people, the good stuff they do is something seperate from their simple essence. Kana"l chapter 10. But for one, the stuff is a sign on an etzem, like the color of an apple showing on its sweetness, and for the other its artificial, like an apple painted red.}
 אלא כמו בחי' זיו ואור של העצם כהארת זיו אור השמש וכחיות אור הנפש בכלי הגוף וכהתחכמות מכח השכל וכה"ג והיותר דמיון אמיתי לגלוי ההעלם הוא כמו גלוי התנוע' מן החי וכאותיות המח' ואותיות הדיבור וכה"ג 
Four mishalim for etzem and hispashtus: light from sun, light of candle, chayus into body, throwing. Throwing - you're putting energy in, candle - the candle is burning, its putting itself into the fire, sun - the light is something which is coming out.
Giluy ha'helem is where you "see" the etzem {that the stuff which is happening is an automatic and effortless giluy of an etzem, kana"l}. The above mishalim also have this property, it just depends on you how you look at it. {I think that's what R.W. means.}
Movement- moving stuff takes effort, but it makes you stronger. The body becomes a better vessel, and automatically the soul is better able to shine into it. {The effort is an inyan of etzem v'hispashtus. L'chora for the ability that is put into the body to do something takes effort. But to the etzem thing of being alive, movement is an automatic giluy of an etzem, an inyan of helem v'giluy, kana"l.} 
{The czar was shown plans for a very roundabout train track. He asked "Why not make it streight?" He was told "Mountains." He took a pencil and drew a streight line. "Here's the train track." What are you going to do? The earth shook because of the czar's pencil. One thing is being revealed over here, namely the power of the czar. But there are two parts to this: The line with the pencil and the shaking earth. 
Someone who is kind decides to help someone. Two things: the decision, and the actual doing the kind act, with everything that has to go into that.
Perhaps you can say [l'hair, by this point nobody should still be reading this, and it's a peleh that I'm bothering to write this] that there's two things. To the etzem thing of being kind, or of royal power, or of movement, any particular expression is something effortless. "I'm kind, so of course if the oppritunity arises I'll do something kind." "I'm alive, so I can move." ["dead dogs don't bark"- from a student of Rabbi Yosi Markel.]  Then there's what the Mittler rebbe described a few lines ago as כח הפועל שמתפשט בפעולה, the acting power which spreads out in an action. 
There's the essential thing that the soul is alive, and can enliven. Then there's a tzimtzum, and the soul goes into the body. [Kana"l. I'm not going to get into the whole tzimtzum thing now.] As it is found within the body as the power which spreads out in an action, movement takes effort. But to the [reletive] etzem, which is not squished into the body, the movement is just a giluy.
Like with the czar: To the czar, the train track is just a giluy of his absolute power. But when that goes through his speech, or in this case pencil, and filters down to his highest ministers, and from there to the secerateries, to the written commands to the reginal leaders, to the contractors to the laborers to the actual building of the train track and blowing up mountains - now there's an acting power spreading out to action, which takes effort. So there's to things in one action: its a spreading out of a practical power, and an effortless giluy of an essential power.}
Light of sun - the light is etzem v'hishpashtus, but when it's revealing the sun it's an inyan of giluy hahelem. Two scenarios: if the sun lights up your room, you see the light as being seperate. But outside, if you look at the sun, you don't see "light", you just see the form of the sun, the light is just revealing the form of the sun, it doesn't exist as its own thing. In your room, etzem v'hispashtus. Outside, giluy ha'helem. {So again we see both things, its the spreading out of a practical power and a giluy of an essential power.}
Chayus in body. The chayus is a simple thing, it's not comprised of different abilites, but they're revealed seperately. The eye is only a vessel for sight, ear for hearing, etc. Those individual abilities are etzem v'hispashtus. The inyan of giluy ha'helem over here is that the better the vessel, the more light. Even though the chayus isn't giving more, its just that the body isn't blocking the chayus as much, the chayus can be more revealed automaticaly.
Getting a new idea from your ability to think - the idea is already there, the teacher is just trying to get you to see it. {A teacher shows his student a complex classical song. "what do you hear?" "a mess" "listen again." Or the student says, "I don't get it". Teacher: "No, you do understand it!" This (frusterating) conversation happens when the teacher sees that the student understands all the explanations, he has all the pieces, but he can't put them together to see the single idea that connects them. For example, studying a sugya in gemara - the student see's the pieces, really he has the sechel, he just doesn't realize it. The teacher helps him see what he really already has. Or like an optical illusion. Look at it a bit more deeply, and you see the man between the trees. But this inyan applies to any learning.} "Taught the entire torah before born" - the ability to have ideas, you can see truth. Through learning, you'll see how this perception can be revealed in this case. And the more you refine your brain, the more this light will be able to revealed over there.
וכ"ז יותר אמיתי מדמיון שלהבת הקשורה בהעלם בגחלת שאעפ"י שבגחלת היה השלהבת בהעלם
And when you blown on the coal the flame is revealed.
 אבל הרי עכ"פ ממהות חום שבגחלת יצא השלהב'
{This pararagraph isn't totally clear.} The coal is actually on fire.{?}  The flame is when the gas released by burning becomes ionized through heat.{?}  There's a direct connection, the fire itself is giving heat, its an etzem v'hispashtus thing. But the light of the fire isn't heat, the light is a giluy ha'helem thing like has been discussed earlier. When you see the light/flame, you know that its hot/burning. But the light isn't the actual burning. Rusting is the same as burning {oxidation} just going very slow. {And even though its really the same thing, there's no light shining from rusting.}


Part 3
 ואין זה אמיתית ענין הגלוי שאינו רק כמו בחי' מראה וגוון לבד כגוון התפוח
If the apple is green, it's not ripe, if it's red its not. But the color isn't the ripeness, it's just a sign. Or on the inside: if its white its sweet, if its brown its starting to go bad. But the whiteness isn't the sweetness- painting it red or white isn't going to make it taste any better.
 שאינו ממהות התפוח9 וכידוע
There's no inherent connection between sweetness and red. But Hashem made it that for an apple these two things always go together, so its consistant, and we can use one as a sign for the other.
GIluy ha'helem - when one thing represents another thing: its not the actual thing that its representing, but it shows on its existence.
 וכך הוא בגלוי העל' עצם כחות הנפש כמו כח מדת החסד בעצם שגלוי שלו היינו כאשר מצד עצמיו' מדה זו בעצם הנפש הרי מתהוו' רצון ושכל של חסד וטוב תמיד
You can see that someone is a nice guy because he's always doing nice things.
 ולהיפך במי שמדתו העצמית באכזריות מתהווה רצון ושכל לדין ועונש
You can't see a person's cruelty, you can just see things that they say and do, which are a sign of the essence.
 והנה התהוות מקור לרצון זה לחסד או לדין נחשב עדיין מעצם המדה שאינו נבדל הימנה כלל
The source of these particular desires, A"K, is still the actual thing of kindness etc.
 אבל מה שנולד רצון בגלוי לדין או להיפוכו זהו רק כמו בחי' התגלות מראה לעצם
But its not the actual thing. Even if you'll take something as extreme as tieing someone to a bench and cutting him up - if he's doing it to have a good time at the other guy's expense, that's cruel. But if he's a surgeon doing a surgery, its a big kindness. The idea that a particular action must be a sign of a particular personality is wrong, and is a source of a lot of unesscary bad feelings. {For example, someone took a parking place that's reserved for me. It must be that he's a etc. But maybe not. Maybe etc.}
Someone might be doing something wrong, but that could be a sign of a desire to be good and holy, just that he was misled or wasn't taught. {"He means well."} Or like how a person could use a word wrong because he doesn't really know what it means, and from the context you can figure out what he means.
So his leaning towards always wanting to do kind things is part of the thing of being kind. But the things he does are seperate. So an action which would normally be considered mean could be an expression of kindness. For example strictness in education. Rebbe Rashab in Chanoch L'na'ar: If you intend for the child's best, he'll realize, and everything will work out.


Part 4 {sign for skipping: {...}}
[אבל מה שנולד רצון בגלוי לדין או להיפוכו זהו רק כמו בחי' התגלות מראה לעצם] כהתגלות התנועה בעצם החי 
The movement isn't the actual vitaility - making something move {even with electrodes} doesn't make it alive. But if its alive, a sign for that is movement.
וכגלוי החיות
the conciousness/awareness of the soul
 בדבר נבדל שהוא הגוף
The action of the body is a sign that there is a concious soul over there. For example, you see that a person is aware because you see his eyes following you. {Thats the awareness inside/as its expressed through the body.} Or you can check that a baby can hear and see by seeing if he responds to diffrent stimuli . 
 שמפני שהוא חי בעצם מגלה חיותו בתנועה וכן מפני שהוא דבר חי בעצם מחיה גם לגוף הדומם שנק' חיי בשר כו' כי גלוי רצון זה בא בדבר נבדל
{the similiarity of the revealed desire being dicussed in this chapter to the revelation of the soul in the body is that} the conciousness of the body is a sign to the soul, but its only a revelation in something seperate, its not the actual thing.
 שהוא ענין זה של חסד או דין אבל מקור המוליד רצון זה הוא
{...}
 בא מכח עצם המדה לבד
But its not it. {Because even A"K isn't the etzem, its the etzem trying to fit into the world. But it's still very tied in to the etzem. Someone who is kind in A"K is a kind person, someone who is kind with his revealed desires - not neccesarily. Maybe he's kind, maybe he was paid very well, maybe in this case that action which is normally kind  is cruel.}
 ומובן ממילא בהיות שיש כמה אופני דברי' שיוליד רצון מיוחד לכ"א ממקור א' שהוא תלוי בעצם המדה תמיד כו'
A person with the hidden desire to be kind will have because of that many diffrent particular desires which express that depending on whats going on. {"Being that... it must be that it depends..." Tz"I the proof. Maybe only the etzem can have that degree of pshitus, and find a way to express itself in so many ways?}
 וגם שכל המטה תמיד כלפי רצון וחסד היינו רק מצד עצם מדת החסד שמוליד תמיד רצון ושכל לחסד דוקא ויש כמה ענינים נבדלים ולכ"א מוליד רצון ושכל בפ"ע כו' וד"ל:
A"K - connection between the essential middos, the iggulim of A"K, and the particular desires, the iggulim of Atzilus. By themselves, a particular desire isn't automaticually connected to the essential middos. Even the desire to cut someone - this could be a chesed, or a gevura, you have to see how is it connected to their middos. The connection is made in A"K, where he creates an image of himself and of the world and figures out what stuff will express what when.
The desire of the soul to be in the body creates a desire to eat and drink, because in this physical reality you have to do that to stick around. Or a feeling of hunger becomes/creates a desire for food. It doesn't have to be like that, but here it is like that, and when that's figured out the desire for {the relief of} one becomes the desire for the other.
ונמצא שהרצון לרצון של חסד בכלל יוכל להוליד כמה רצונות של חסד בפרט בכמה ענינים שונים באופנים שונים מאד והכל ממקור אחד שהוא רצון הנעלם הנק' עצם הרצון של חסד מצד עצמיות המדה ההיולית רק שבא בדרך פרט להיות רצון לרצון זה בדבר פרט זה כו' וד"ל. 
{...}
ומובן עכ"פ שיש הפרש גדול בין גלוי הרצון לחסד שאינו רק בחי' גלוי ההעלם של עצם הרצון המוליד רצון זה
{and between the "etzem haratzon" - in this case reffering to A"K.}
 שהוא בא מכח עצם המדה שהוא אינו בחי' נבדל כו' וד"ל.
[5:50] A big diffrence between the revealed desire and A"K - the revealed isn't something that you really want, its just a means to an end. Like if someone is hungry and he makes a whole plan to get pizza - and then someone shows up with pizza! So his whole plan goes out the window, becuase he never really wanted that, he wanted the pizza that he would get from that. And now he has it.
World yesh m'ayin - that it's not something which is inherently desirable, it is connected to something that he wants. If that desire would go away, then the world would also.
Davening - fix the connection, show that really what your animal soul wants is a connection to Hashem {as is described that in davening we describe how the source of the animal soul is botul to Hashem, chayos srufim, etc.}
Two things - iskafya and ishapcha, "I will do" and "I will understand". To work your way up, higher and higher, to change your way of looking at things is a change from understanding. "The brain rules over the heart" - sechel creates the translation of the essential desire to the born desire, the sechel changing automatically changes what comes out. Ishapcha.
But untill a person can change like that, he has to just do it, which is an inyan of iskafya. "Puduh b'sholom etc" - things not being automatic is part of the plan, or else we would have been created perfect. There will always be stuff we enjoy and stuff we don't, there can always be a hiskafya, to push ourselves to do more, better, etc.
First - the reason why Hashem made it that there could be such a thing that I don't feel on fire to do something good is in order to have a meaningful relationship. {If you always wanted to do it, so - what if you didn't want? Would you do it anyway for Hashem? Or are you just doing it for yourself?} Then there could be a thing of nishma/ishapcha {that your on fire, and that your being on fire is actually a real that thing that is for Hashem, not yourself, as we see that even when you weren't so interested you did it anyway}.
For example finishing davening, not to take teffillin off immidiately, to show at least in action that this is something which is a priority for you, even if you don't feel like it.  And then you have to realize that "hey, this really is a big deal."


Part 5
 ועד"מ זה יובן ענין קורא הדורו' מראש דא"ק כו' כמשל הקורא דבר שיצא מהעלמו לגלוי לחוץ 
Like someone is hiding, and you call to him to come out.
כך כל עיקר בחי' ע"ס דאצי' הוא שיצאו מהעלמם לגלוי בלבד
Hashem had{decided} his essential desire for a dira b'tachtonim, iggulim of A"K, and he decided what kind of thing would express that, A"K, so when there's a question of what's supposed to happen, on a global level or on a day to day action level, ie halacha, the answer comes automaticaly {it was already decided in a concealed way and just comes into revelation based on whats going on now} from A"K.
 וע"כ נקראו בשם אורות או ספי' כמו זיו ואור
[1:20] Light, its only a revelation of the luminary, the etzem. A"K is an essential thing, and Atzilus is only a giluy of that. Chesed of Arich - anything that Hashem creates will constantly need his power to give it its existance, he is the only true exestence so anything else needs him. Everythings' constant dependance on Hashem to keep their existance is a revealation of Hashem's decision in A"K to reveal himself as being the ultimate creator.
 וכמו כל בחי' גלוי ההעלם שאינו רק בבחי' אור וכבחי' מראה וגוון וכמו תנועת החי כו' והיינו כמו ויאצל מן הרוח10 שאין זה רוחו של משה 
He didn't lose his ruach.
רק בחי' גלוי אורו וזיוו לבד הוא שנאצל והופרש
Like Rashi explains, that its like a candle, that giving fire to other candles doesn't make it have less. Like a shliach - has the ruach of the Rebbe. He goes out with his goals etc, and as long as he m'vatels himself to his ratzon, he'll reveal it. Torah - its Hashem's wisdom, but if a person works to understand it people will say he's smart, their a vessel for Torah. Similiarly with Moshe - Hashem made it that the other people should be a vessel for Moshe's ruach.
 כגלוי שלהבת מן הגחלת וכה"ג כו'
{...}
 וכ"ז יובן ע"פ משל הנ"ל מענין גלוי הרצון בדבר נבדל שיוצא מהעלם עצם הרצון שמצד עצמיות כנ"ל
What is revealed comes from his natural leaning towards certain things, kindness etc Kana"l, which these leanings come from who he is.
 כך בחי' כתרים דע"ס דאצי' הן רק בחי' גלוי רצון לגבי העלם עצם הרצון שנק' רצון לרצון שהוא בבחי' א"ק כנ"ל
Hashem's wanting that a dwelling place in the lower worlds should be in a certain way, an inyan of A"K, causes the revealed chochma in Torah to be in a certain way, according to what brings the world closer and farther to that state. If he wanted it in a diffrent way, then also down here things would change.
 וכמו מבחי' העלם הרצון דחסד דא"ק נמשך גלוי רצון לחסד דאצי' שנק' כתר דחסד כו' 
The desire to be revealed as a creator is a source of the desire to create this world.
וכן מבחי' העלם רצון דחכמ' כו'
...comes the desire to reveal wisdom in the world, particularly (in) the Torah.

 
Part 6
אך כמו שמובן ממשל הנ"ל שזהו הנק' התהוות רצון לרצון הרי הוא בא בבחי' הכלל
General ratzon for everything that you'll ever do.
 להוליד כמה מיני רצון וכמה1 ענינים אופנים2 שונים כו'
What you'll do to be kind will vary widely depending on what's going on.
 כך מבחי' רצון לרצון לחסד בא"ק נולד כמה מיני גלוי רצון של חסד באצי' והענין הוא דמבחי' המל' של מדה דא"ק נעשה בחי' כתר דמדה דאצי'
Malchus of A"K - the set form of what a person see's himself as. {L'chora two things: the pnimiyus of the image and the chitzonyus. As it is known from baa'l p'or. Malchus is the the external definitions of the image which connect directly to/ have an opinion on reality.) Like if someone wants to be a big talimid chocom. To do this, they first have to have some sort of an idea of what it means to be such a person. Once they have a particular image of what they want to be like, then when a particular situation arises when a choice must be made they see which one matches that image. So from malchus comes keser.
 ובכללות הע"ס הרי רק מבחי' מל' דא"ק נעשה כתר דאצי' 
{...}
והוא רק מבחי' אותיות וגלוי עצם העלם הרצון נעשה אור העצם של גלוי רצון כו' (שהוא כמו שמבואר באות הי"ח דרק מבחי' סוף מעשה דעצם הרצון נעשה רצון לרצון שהוא ע"ס דא"ק) (ע"ד דוגמא מגלוי רצון שבדבור המשפיע נעש' עצם הרצון למקבל
Relationship between servant and king. Really, the servant isn't just interested in making sure that what the king says is done and in keeping his job, rather he's completely given over to the king himself. But the etzem of the king is concealed, therefor the whole desire of the servant can only come from the revealed desire of the king, his command. The complete given over-nes of the servant is revealed in his complete self sacrifice. Even though he really wants the etzem, and all he has is an external giluy, but because this is connected to the etzem, it calls out the total self sacrifice of the servant.
 כמו שמאותיות גלוי השכל שבדבור שבמשפיע נעשה עצם אור השכל במקבל
The student belives that the teacher knows, so he sets himself aside and botuls himself to the teacher and accepts what he says as being true {at least for now} and just to try to understand. Otherwise, he might not understand it properly.
 וכך רק מאותיות וגלוי חסד שבדבור דמשפיע נעשה אור הרצון לחסד למקבל
A loves B, if B says he loves C, then A will love C also becuase A loves B. Or A and B can be the same guy, meaning if a person just verbalizes, or thinks, about the positive qualities of another person, that awakens a love for that person. But here the example is more from speaking to someone else.
 כידוע בכל עו"ע שמבחי' האחרונ' שבעילה3 נעשה ראש ושרש לעלול וכך מבחי' מל' דא"ק בכלל נעשה בחי' כתר דע"י כו'
That Hashem decides what will be revealed from A"K now, which is the inyan of "Koreh ha'doros meirosh", and the desires in Atzilus come out based on that.
 דהיינו מבחי' גלוי רצון לרצון שבדבור בלבד נעשה בחי' מקור כל גלוי רצון שמצד התענוג שנק' כתר דע"י כו' וכמשי"ת)
The reason a person enjoys a certain thing is because he sees himself as being that kind of a person. But if you take a guy who see's himself as a serious learner who never talks during seder and you start a conversation with him, it'll cause him agmas nefesh.
 והיינו כללות ענין הע"ס דאצי' שיצאו מהעלם ע"ס דא"ק כמ"ש קורא הדורות מראש כו':
A"K - the general way that Hashem wants to reveal himself, ten sfiros etc, and moshiach and dira b'tachtonim. That defines everything that will happen. That's how there could be prophecy - if you know what are the desires in A"K, you'll know what will happen later. 
{Now, prophecy doesn't go up to A"K. Even Moshe - maybe Atzilus? I'll have to check the sicha for this week, haazinnu. But I don't think even he had that. It seems the intention here is that the reason prophecy is possible, even from a lower level, is because on a higher level there is a certain pre-defined future. Although l'chora even that could change based on our actions. Meaning, the inyan of A"K is the general image. Based on that particular desires are made according to the situation. If the situation changes, the desire which will end up actually being revealed will be changed.
For example, the prophecy that the Beis Hamikdosh would be destroyed, R"L. Based on this inyan, it would seem that this could be predicted beforehand because there is a certain image of whats supposed to be going on, and the Yidden weren't keeping to it, so based on G'vura of A"k or something its pretty clear that things aren't going to work out so well. And the actual vision would be in Yetzira or something, kana"l. But if the Yidden would have done t'shuva, that would have changed everything. And even though no nevua reaches there, the fact that its defined at some level allows that it could also exist at a lower, percievable level.
Like if there's someone from tech support. Someone might tell him, "Dude, you're gonna get fired." How could he know that? Because there's an image, a general desire of the company. In this case, an image of what a tech guy is supposed to be like, and an image of itself as a tough company that doesn't hesitate to fire people if they aren't up to par. From this image the particular day to day desires come, and according to that, this guy is on his way out. But if he changes, the situation changes, and his being-fired-soon status changes.
L'hair, this doesn't explain why there isn't a chance that any n'vua is into A"K. But it definitely isn't. B'pashtus u'b'chlulis, this is because you could say that a person could percieve the image of the company, but A"K is a little bit bigger than that. For the sake of the moshul, I guess you could say that the mission and image of the company is very deep, and no one can fully grasp it, except in the way that its lowered/simplified/explained closer to action. I don't know the later things, so that could make this trickier.
Although even in a person, you don't see his self image, rather you see what he does, and based on that you can figure out "well, he's giving a ton of money to tzadaka, so probably he probably sees himself as being a philantrophist". And even within a person - he might be aware of what he sees himself as, but the true existance of this self perception is deeper than that. The thought "I am kind" doesn't make him a kind person, b'etzem or on the level of A"K, which is a giluy of the etzem. Even if someone actually thinks that he's a kind person, that doesn't mean that he actually is. I recall reading that a person might convince himself that he posseses an opposite nature to what he actually does, and justify all of his actions that are out of line with his imagined nature. For example, he thinks he's a generous tipper, but he isn't. So when he gives pitiful tips, he says to himself, "Well, the service was bad, so this time I didn't", or "I'm short on cash right now, and I forgot my credit card which gets extra points at the house."
B'kitzur, kana"l, the fact that its defined up there allows that this could be filtered down to a lower level that could be percieved by a person. If it didn't exists before, it wouldn't exist later, at least not without going against the whole seder. You could say any n'vua does, but that's not what Torah says l'chora, and right now we're trying to understand Torah, not random hergeshim. Which, arguably, very accurately desicribes the contents of my notes. But hopefully they're at least minutely better than that.}