Chapter 13


Part 1
(יג) והנמשל מכל הנ"ל יובן למעל' בכללות ענין הצמצום הנק' מק"פ
empty place - a place to put something. The first tzimtzum that left place for us to exist
 שזהו בחי' הסתלקות וההעלם לעצמותו כדי שיוכל להיות אח"כ בחי' השפעת אור כנ"ל ולא שנסתלק ונתעלם לגמרי אלא כמשל הסתלקות והעלם בעצמו הידיעה של כל העומק והאריכות כששונה דרך קיצור כנ"ל
When the teacher teaches in short, doesn't forget the whole huge length etc that he had himself. Also ה, when he makes a tzimtzum and is left with this little thing, or {a little bit later on} a table, he doesn't lose the ability to do everything else. He still has all the other stuff, just like the teacher still has the whole idea {and the whole ability to create ideas} וכו' וד"ל, he doesn't lose his ability by dealing with our world.
 א"כ לפי זה גם אחר כל ההשתלשלות דאבי"ע שעומד במקום פנוי זה הרי בחי' העלם אור העצמות מקיף וסובב לכל השתלשלות דקו
People ask if they can see ה - the truth is you can't not, just that you don't realize
 וכמו שהי' אור העצמות קודם הצמצום ממלא את כל החלל ריקן ומק"פ הזה כמ"ש בע"ח 
{Now, theres this short למשל, but before it was the unlimited גלוי of the teachers understanding}
כך גם אחר הצמצום הרי ישנו לאור העצמיות כמו שהוא בבחי' א"ס ממש
just because he made this world doesn't mean he lost the ability to create anything else - it makes no diffrence to him whatsoever. {Like the teacher - even after the tzimtzum, where there remains this  מקו"פ and reshimu, it makes no diffrence to his unlimited הבנה}
 רק שלא נגלה למטה לגבי שפע המקבלים אבל לגבי עצמותו אין שינוי בזה כלל וכמו משל היודע כל האריכות להשיב לשואלו מיד גם בשעה ששונה לתלמידו בקיצור כו'.
{So - the whole empty space is that there is less, now the mekabel can recieve. But, as we see with the teacher, there is no lessening: even after the tzimtzum,  he still knows everything! That means that there is no concealment to him from the tzimtzum, only to the mekabel. The whole lessening of the empty space doesn't effect him at all, which means that even within it his whole giluy is found, the only thing is that the mekabel doesn't see it.}
 ומ"ש ישת חשך סתרו4 וכמאמרז"ל ברישא חשוכא5 כו'
The gemara asks, why do the (black) goats run in front of the (white) lambs? And answers Because thats the way the world works - first the is darkness, and then light. Why does evil start out on top and only afterwords there's good? Because thats how ה made the world - first tzimtzum, darkness, and only afterwords there's light, because our world is like a puzzle - the message is hidden, and we have to pull it out. Also this world - really all the parts are a גלוי of ה, we just have to pull it out {from concealment}.
 היינו לגבי למט'
But not to ה - he still sees the solution to the puzzle, he already sees how its all a גלוי.
 שנמשך רק מבחי' הרשימו שנשאר אחר ההעלם כנ"ל וזהו אתה קדוש ושמך אור העצמי קדוש6 ומובדל
To ה himself - not effected. And even to giluy - no diffrence, not effected by tzimtzum, to ה it still exists in its full original state {כנ"ל with teacher.}
 ואתה הוא קודם7 כו' כמ"ש אני הוי' לא שניתי8 כו' משום דמה שמגלה עמוקות מני חשך9 והעלם זה אח"כ בהארת הקו הוא דוקא מאותו אור העצמות שלפני הצמצום
e.g. we pull gemara out of mishna - not a new thing, nothing changed - this was the same sechel which was put into the mishna, albeit in a concealed way. Similarly, when we look at the world and see ה, this is the same giluy that was before the tzimtzum.
 וזהו אתה הוא כו' וכידוע ואמנם לא נק' אור העצמות שמקיף ההשתלשלות10 שבמק"פ כו' כמו בחי' מקיף לפנימי
l'pnimi - e.g. someone wants something. That desire is a general desire which includes all the diffrent things that have to be in order to get that, and the details of what they want, its connected to this פועל, its somewhat defined by the goal. Or a lightbulb - its designed for this particular purpose, etc.
Not l'pnimi - e.g. a person's taste. Even though it effects everything that they do, from what ice cream to the details of house. So - its makif it, causes it, but doesn't connect davka to this thing. {unlike a lightbulb, or a particular desire, which are makifim that relate to that thing}. House vs sky.
Makif l'pnimi is connected to something seperate, defined by that. Not on a pnimi - ה can reveal himself in anything, doesn't relate specifically to this world. But if he would reveal himself in this world, he's also revealed in this {like person's taste}. Before tzimtzum itsn't just "power to make this creation", its a giluy of him as he is. Heyuli, could come up with our world. So our world doesn't define before becuase it doesn't relate specifically to it, but it is an expression of it.


Part 2
 כמקיף הכללי דקו שמקיף לאבי"ע בשוה כו'
Before the tzimtzum is not makif in the way that the kav etc is makif.
 כי הרי עדיין אינו בגדר וסוג בחי' אור השפעה כלל
Isn't part of this idea of being given over, like we said earlier about the power of movement, not a movement at all
 גם לא להיות בחי' מקיף כו' רק אור העצמות שהוא בחי' התגלותו כמו שהוא בעצמות
Like we said earlier about the heyuli - its not coats etc, its just him, a giluy of himself
[1:14]
 ולזה אנו אומרים הוא קיים ושמו קיים11 וכן ברוך הוא ברוך שמו12 וכה"ג
kayum - doesn't change at all, still is kayum=is found, boruch - that he is drawn down, he is revealed here.
 רק מבחי' אותיות דגליף בטה"ע זה שהוא מה ששיער בעצמו בכח כו'
what is revealed here {boruch} is only from what was estimated in טהירא-עילאה/גליף-גליפו/קדמון. Like we'll explain later about a person's taste, that it includes the measuring of exactly what he wants in every area of his life, but its not for a particular thing.
 וגם זה הוא הנשאר בבחי' העלם והסתלקות קצת
Even this kadmon is hidden by the tzimtzum
 דהיינו רק לפ"ע אופן הנצרך להשתלשלות אחר צמצום זה וד"ל.
Only what is needed for this creation is revealed. {Perhaps like revealing particular thing from taste, כדלקמן}
Two main points from this moshul of rav u'talmid:
1) Just like the teacher doesn't forget, also ה doesn't lose anything by making a table - same as was before
2) Teacher sees whole idea in reshimu, also ה sees in creation that everything is a giluy of him. And also we should be able to see this, its concealed and we have to work to reveal it. We see it, but we don't know what we're seeing. Like pictures that you look at it but can't see what it is untill its explained to you, but then you see how thats exactly what it is. Also us - torah, mitzvos - its all to clarify creation, to give us a way to see the world properly, as it really is, then you realize that there is only ה.

[4:42]
 וגם עפ"י אופן משל הב' הנ"ל דחיות הנפש בגוף שמשתנה ממהות רוחני למהות גשמי כנ"ל ג"כ אין זה שינוי כלל שהרי כמו שיש קישור וחיבור לחיות הגשמי לחיות הרוחני
{Gashmi - לכורה the physical being alive, heart beating etc, impulses flying. Ruchni - the actual perception. cpu vs gui? }
ממה שרואי' התפעלות הנפש ממקרי חיות הגוף
That the soul is what is perceiving and feeling all that stuff happening כנ"ל.
 ועכ"ז לא ישתנה בעצם הרוחנית מחסרון התפשטות חיות אבר גשמי כנ"ל
On the one hand, the soul is connected. On the other hand, it isn't affected - if the eye is harmed ח"ו it doesn't effect the ability of the soul. {נ"ל: It has to limit itself to go into the body. So you might think that what happens in the body would effect it. But it doesn't, כנ"ל. So we see that even though it seems like it limited itself, really the whole soul still exists, and the body hasn't changed it at all, only that its not revealed לגבי שפע המקבלים. Like with teacher - seems like he's limiting his understanding, but really he still has the whole thing.}
 כך אין שינוי בבחי' אור העצמות להיותו מאיר גם אחר הצמצום
So even though everything is a giluy, can't see "My burning the table makes a change"
 גם שאינו רק לפ"ע ההשתלשלות. הרי יש ביניהם קשר וחיבור
Even though its being revealed in a limited way according to the limitations of the created stuff, is still connected to light before tzimtzum
 ועכ"ז בצמצום האור בבחי' הקו אין זה שינוי כלל באור העצמו'
All the stuff going on, of we daven and things change, and holier things have more of a giluy elokus - seems like a hispaylus from what happens! But this is only after the tzimtzum. ועצ"ע.
וכן עפ"י משל זה וכן עפ"י משל הג' מכח התנועה בגשם או כמשל התחכמות מכח המשכיל הנ"ל הכל עולה לסגנון א' כנ"ל באריכות וד"ל.
Not k'pshuto from his point of view, doesn't become lessened from making the world, and even within the world sees a full giluy of himself, and really from ours also. And even change from davening, from him himself, but its still not a change, as we understand a little bit and as will be explained more later.

[8:19]
 ואמנם בבחי' הרשימו שמבואר למעל' שזהו כמו הקיצור שכלול בו כל האריכות הנה למעל' יובן מזה שזהו בחי' כח ההגבלה שיש באור א"ס הבלתי מוגבל בעצם דהיינו להביא כל הארו' אור העצמות הבלתי גבול בבחי' הגבול שזהו ענין הרושם שכולל בבחי' הגבלה מבחי' כל עצמות אא"ס כמשל הקיצור שכולל הכל כו'


Part 3
 כי הוא ית' כל יכול וכלול בו ג"כ מכח המגביל להגביל ולכלול ברשימה א' מכל אור העצמות כו' וכמ"ש במ"א באריכות13. אך הנה באמת אין זה דמיון אמיתי לבחי' הרשימו הנשאר בחלל ריקן ומק"פ הנ"ל כי הוא מורה שנסתלק משם הכל ולא שנשאר איזה אור רק שהוא בקצור וגבול אלא רק בחי' רשימו בעלמא כו' א"כ הדמיון האמיתי הוא מרושם וציון קו קצר שעושין האומנין שכולל כל אריכות מעשה הבנין
A few lines that a artist etc makes to remember his design - there isn't any explanation at all, just a few lines. But from that you can make the whole building.
 ויותר מזה כמו האות לזכרון כנ"ל וכך למעל' כתיב זכר רב טובך14 העצמי כו' וכה"ג
The world is made in a way that ה is completely hidden. So we don't feel like we see him when we see stuff. He is only revealed like a mneumonic, that it seems like a seperate thing {without any connection to its source}, but it hints.
 ויותר בהעלם והסתלקות הוא כמשל הזורק אבן כו' כנ"ל וכך אמר בס' הבהיר16 וכמו זרקא17 כו'
that looks like an independent system, seperate
 שהרי בחי' הרשימו נשאר נבדל בריחוק מקום מעצמות האור וכו' ונקרא כח הנעלם ברשימו זו בחי' העלם אור נבדל מהעלם עצמות האור דא"ס
{"helem or" - in the reshimus the light is concealed. "העלם עצמות האור דא"ס" - and the light is concealed in its source, can't see that that's the source, and like the moshul בסמוך.}
 כמו כח נבדל הנעלם בזריקת אבן שבא מכח היד שכבר נעלם בעצמו כו'
Hidden in the stone - can't see כח, source. Also in arm which threw - now its at rest, can't see that its giving to stone.
 (וכדמיון כל הגלגלים וכוכבי לכת שסובבי' מכח תנועה אלקי' הנעלם שבא בבחי' זריקה15 מאור וכח האלקי דט' כלי' החיצוני' דמל' דעשי' שנק' זה כח הנבדל בחי' מל' שבמל'
{The strength comes from the ט כלים. As that strength is used to throw, and appears seperate within that which was thrown, it's called מל' דמלכות.}
So - if look and see how really ה's כח is behind it, thats a giluy of malchus, ט' כלים חיצונים. If we see things as being seperate, ה started it going and headed off for other things, thats a giluy of מל' שבמלכות. Because really all the levels exist at all times, just a matter of what we percieve.
 הבא בערך ריחוק נבדל ולא כמו הכתיבה באצבע או כח יד הפועל עצמו בנפעל שזהו גלוי עצם הכח בקירוב שנק' בחי' מל' (כמ"ש19 במ"א באריכות18 )
{The parenthesis ends here. It should be either "מל' כמ"ש" or "באריכות18 )) ומשלים" . Either way, it ends here.}
 ומשלים היותר קרובים לזה הוא כמו הרמז שהשכל בהעלם בתנועה הגשמיית
See hand sign - don't see any intellect. But really its there. Also the physical world - we just see stuff. But really there's much more than that.
 שזהו נק' בחי' הלבשה ותפיסא בדבר נבדל כו'
Like a moshul - its being expressed by something different.
 וכן כשכותב שכל וחכמה בתנועת האצבע כו' כנ"ל
Physical movement, but a language. Also all the creation - seems like a helem, but really its all there.
 כך למעלה בחי' הרשימו בחי' דבר נבדל בערך שבו מלובש בהעלם מכללות אור העצמו' כו' וד"ל.


Part 4
 ואמנם מכל אלה יובן עכ"פ כללות ענין הרשימו דגם שהוא בא בבחי' הסתלקו' הכל ולא נשא' בה רק בהעלם גדול בחי' תכלית הקיצור והרמז כו' או ככח נבד' כו' אבל מ"מ מזה עצמו בא ונמשך כל פרטי ההשתלשלו' דקו שנמשך מרשימו זו כי ברשימו זו להיותה כוללת הכל בהעלם עכ"פ היא הנותנת שיוכל לבא הכל בהתגלות ע"י בחי' הקו עד סוף העשי'
Even though its very hidden - but at least its there, and if its there it can be taken out. How it can be taken out will be explained in the next chapter.
{How we see that everything is in the Reshimu:}
 וכמאמר כל היצור לא נכחד ממך20 ממך דוקא
{Now will show where this principle is expressed}
 שזהו הכל נעשה ונמשך בגלוי כמו שעלה ברצונו הפשוט בעצמו' האור שלפני הצמצום כמו ששיער בעצמו כו' 
{Goes both directions: Everything that is after is from the measure...}
שהרי במח' קדומה זו ששיער בעצמו הוא צופה ומביט הכל בסקירה א'21
{... as we see that the measure is for everything.}
{Everything exists before [לא נכחד], as we see that everything was done according to the measure that was before. And as it existed before, its whole existence is a giluy of him, completely non-seperate from him, so it really includes everything. ועצ"ע.}
 דהיינו מה שנסקר בהעלם ובקיצור ורמז ברשימו זו כו'
{And this whole thing, which is entirely just a giluy of him, was put into the reshimu. So everything is in the reshimu, albeit in a hidden way כנ"ל.} {Or we can explain more simply that "everything" means "everything that will be revealed." But I don't think that that is exclusively correct . (Its also true, if has mamesh everything has this also)}
 וה"ז
{this that the reshimu is very hidden, and from it comes everything}
 כמשל רושם האומן שממנו דוקא ידע לעשו' כל אריכות מעש' הבנין בפרטי פרטיו מראשו לסופו רק כדי שלא יתעלם ממנו טעמו ונימוקו בעצמותו לאריכות הענין הוא עושה לו רושם לזכרון שלא ינטה מזה ולא יצטרך לעיין בעצמו מחדש וכמ"כ ענין הציונים ללימוד עמוק שבעצמו כו' שזהו תועלת לידע מהם כל אורך עיון עומק עצמותו שיש לו פן ינטה ממנו כו'
Nimshal: Everything, down to the number of times and the way a particular blade of grass waves in the wind at a particular moment, was measured, planned, before. And thats all למשל put into the blueprint, how things are supposed to be, and then everything is done according to that.
Question: The moshul has two points, that he shouldn't forget and that he shouldn't deviate. So how does this moshul apply to ה? Why does ה need the reshimu?
Answer: We have to take the limitations of the moshul and put them on us: 
	He wants it to seem like at one time he was involved, and he decided how everything would be, and now its just going on its own. And this appearence is even in Atzilus. You see that ה is involved, but without his etzem getting involved, without any new creating, just following the system that he set up.
	Two things that he wants it to look like: That he's not reaching back into the עומק {Etzem?}, and that he won't change from what was set up. Reason: to give us avodah. Story: The Rebbe Rashab made ה promise that he wouldn't change the seder hishtalshelus when bochurim understand it wrong to make them right.
	1) The reshimu gives this image there is a set reality, and that we have to do a particular avoda to bring it to a particular state, y'mos hamoshiach. Really, anything could be changed. But this appearence that it can't be, that this is something real, gives place for our avoda, and makes it {seem?} important and neccessary.
	2) Makes it seem that every moment isn't coming from the etzem. Otherwise, it wouldn't seem like a system, rather we would realize that at every moment ה is deciding what to do {and that nothing is set}. Like teacher - he makes a system of tests and grades and passing - makes it seem like a set, unchangable thing, something beyond him that he has to work with. Otherwise, the students don't feel the importance - its all from the teacher, and {they feel that} they  could always just ask him and he'll change it. Sometimes we do, when we daven we ask ה to be nice and change the system. But these two points hold true unless we try to reach past it.


Part 5
 וכך בחי' הרשימו הזאת הכוללת ברמז ובקיצור מכל אור העצמות הנעלם בה הוא עצמו המקור לכל ההמשכו' דקו"ח
The source of everything looking seperate, and of אלוקות being hidden, is the reshimu, that everything comes after such a level.
 בבחי' מקיף ופנימי מראשו לסופו שיהי' הכל כמו שעלה ברצונו וחכמתו הפשוטה בעצמו' אור א"ס ממש כו'
That now, when we look, it seems that there was at one time a plan, and now everything is just following that plan, it seems set and independent.
 וזהו מ"ש במ"א שהנקודה יש בה העלם והתגלות22 ב' הפכי' העלם מכל מה שעליון הימנה בערך
{Not that its really a concealment - as we explained earlier, to ה theres no diffrence before or after, rather} when we look at it, it seems to us that everything that is before is completely concealed.
 וגילוי הכל למקבלים נמצא ממנה דוקא
Like the Mishna - {to us} its a great concealment for the greatness of the ideas that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi understood - and at the same time the gemara and all that we have comes from there! {So it conceals what is above from us, and yet all גלוי comes from there, and this giluy is what was above and then concealed. So is the reshimu a concealment or a revealation? Thats where the kav comes in.}
 והוא בחי' הקו שנמשך מן הרשימו
This גלוי to the מקבלים is the קו.
 שהוא כצורת ו' שראשו י' והולך ונמשך למטה כמ"ש במ"א באריכות
Vov is thinner than yud, shows that kav is less then reshimu. Reshimu is a point, but a point of the א"ס - so the nothing of the reshimu is bigger then our whole השתלשלות of the kav. Like we see in the mishna - no matter how much you get from there, gemara ועוד, theres always more. Also this world - it follows, but {this doesn't mean like being an adult follows being an infant, where the whole person is concealed but only this person can come out of there, rather} really something totally different could have come from the reshimu {what comes out is only one line, and really theres an infinite number of lines, as will be explained in the next two chapters}.
 ובכל זה מובן כללות ענין הצמצום דמק"פ ובחי' הרשימו והקו שהוא רק בחי' הגבלה בעצמו' כדי שיומשך הכל בגלוי
The general ענין of these three things, tzimtzum reshimu kav, is that in order to reveal the world in one particular way, hid the rest of his ability. But he didn't lose his ability (כנ"ל באריכות that tzitzum לא כפשוטו), and its still a complete giluy, כנ"ל. In a way, more of a giluy - this that he wants it to be in this particular way is a giluy of him.
 וז"ש כי עמך מקור חיים1 באורך העצמי נראה אור
From the light of אא"ס, "your light" before the צמצום, is seen a different light. 
 אור של תולד'
Moshul: Strong light shining on a metal curtain. None of the original light can come through. But it heats up the metal, causing it to glow. This second light is called a "born light". And from this born light you can "see" the original light - know it must be there, and you even tell where its shining the strongest {and how strong it is etc}, but you can't see the original light at all. נמשל: Because of the tzimtzum we see sefiros and עולמות, but we don't see how this is giluy of ה himself. The tzimtzum gives place for our avodah, כנ"ל, we work to go past that, דירה בתחתונים, to see the true reality.
 שהוא בחי' הקו וכמשי"ת בעז"ה
And as we'll explain in the next two chapters what this kav is all about.
 וזה כל האדם להעמיק דעתו בכ"ז וכיוצא בו 
Obtain a deep sensitivity that really the whole creation is nothing, and everything is only from ה. And: וזה כל האדם - to see past this first tzimtzum. Living with the concealment - the world is טופת מקום, that could lead to being מקל on תו"מ. Seeing past allows that our whole רצון is to connect, and effects how we go about it - proudly, without reason to be מתפעל from the world.
מפני שמזה דוקא יבוא לכלל היחוד האמיתי
This awareness is the main thing to allow us to connect to ה, as was explained that the world becomes less powerful in our eyes and ה is realized to be the עיקר. Otherwise we could be negatively effected by what we see as being real. Have the right goal, and not to be מתפעל from the world. 
 בהתקשרו' נפשו בחיי כל החיים העליונים שהוא עצמות אא"ס ממש מטעם הנ"ל וד"ל:
