Chapter 20


Part 1
In this chapter is explained how the iggulim and yosher of Atzilus relate to each other
(כ) והנה קודם שיבואר ענין פרטי הע"ס דאצי' יש להקדים ענין נקודה ספי' פרצוף4 כו' להיות ידוע ההפרש שבין בחי' התהו לבחי' התיקון בכלל די"ס דתהו הן בבחי' נקודות5 לבד שהן בבחי' הכתרים
Nekuda: the etzem expresses itself in a particular thing {midah?} as a bias. {In a minute this will be contrasted with A"K.} {The giluy of etzem in kindness is the leaning a person has towards kindness in general.} {Or maybe: the leaning towards chesed in a particular situation. For example, when someone trys to pickpocket him and his first thought is, "Well, he's in a tough situation...unstead of calling the cops I"ll give him some money", that bias is an expression of his etzem in chesed.} 
The bias is a point which all the other stuff spreads out from, not a particular desire.
{Rabbi Walters holds that what's being discussed over here is the general bias. VTzI"K.}
 ובעולם התיקון הוא בבחי' התחלקו' כל ספי' לי' ע"כ ממילא נעשה בחי' התיקון
{This will be more fully explained later on. But b'chlolis u'b'kitzur, the simplest example, when chesed has a real intellect, a real apreatiation that if something is going to be done, it has to be sensible, and there has to be logical steps in place to do it, then it can get along with intellect. They have commen ground to relate to each other. Unlike l'moshul if you have someone who has sechel for what he does, but its a totally warped and biased sechel under the complete control of his chesed, an intelect will not be able to talk to him. For example, someone who has absurd dreams which totally don't fit with reality, and his plans of how to make them happen are even more outlandish and he totally doesn't realize because his intellect is completely subservient to his kindness. Like wanting peace with Arab Muslim terrorists who want you dead, and thinking that giving them large amounts of your territory is a very reasonable way to get them to love you and stop killing your people with such alarming regularity.}
 שהוא בחי' ההתכללות ע"י שם מ"ה כו'
Abstract - mah, concrete - ban. {Sculpture: the form being put onto it, vs the material} Language - physical words for abstract idea.
 וביאור הדברים ידוע שבחי' הנקודו' הוא בחי' העצמיות טרם שמתפשט
Like we said earlier about iggulim and yosher, like soul as it is outside the body vs inside, similarly here, the way it is really vs the way it spreads out. And before it spreads out it is [...כנקודה]
 כנקודה שהיא בלתי מתפשטת כו'
still in its undefined heyuli state
 כמו אור מדת החסד הנה בחי' עצמיו' דמדת החסד הוא בחי' הכתר שלו
The essence of being kind is wanting to be kind in general, and because of that when a particular situation arises he will want to be kind there, and then he'll actually do it. {Next sentance explains how that's distinct from A"K.}
 ואמנם אין הכונה על בחי' העצמיו' דמדת החסד כמו שהוא נטוע ומושרש בעצם הנפש שנק' יחידה כנ"ל שהוא בחי' היולי לגמרי (כנ"ל באות יו"ד וי"א) אלא הכונה הוא על בחי' גלוי הרצון לדבר חסד פרטי מן העלם חסד העצמיו' ההיולי
[4:20] To actually do something kind. A"K - because he's nice, he decided that he wants to be a nice person, and he figured out what that looks like. Now, based on that, there's diffrent things that he wants to do. {The leaning towards chesed that was mentioned earlier.} {He can't do these things yet because he doesn't have the opritunity.} But the etzem is still there, he's doing this because he is essentialy a nice person.
 שגם זה הרצון הוא בלתי התפשטו' עדיין
He wants to be nice, but right now nothings going on, so he isn't actually able to do something kind. {L'chora the correct explanation, as implied from the next line, is that it doesn't spread out into other sfiros.}
 רק כמו שהוא בלא טעם כלל לרצון זה למה רוצה בגלוי לחסד זה כו'
No reason, he just wants to be nice because its nice, vs nice to get influence etc.
{The Mittler Rebbe will bring an example in a minute from someone who is kind to another because he did him a favor. Nice to get influence l'chora is an incorrect example, in so far as it's debatable wether that's an expression of chesed.
L'chora a reason could also be the justification for being nice. Why give him money, he should go get a job? Or his family should be helping him? Muvon U'poshut, that sechel of chesed is also about figuring out whats the best thing to do and whats the best way to get that done, but here the Mittler Rebbe writes "Without reason", so thats the vort of sechel that we're going on.}
 ומכ"ש שאין בו בחי' התחלקות אופני' שוני'
There's no reason to be kind, and certainly not yet for a particular kind action - in general, whatever is kind. Like if someone wants money, he doesn't care how he will get it, he just wants it. Also here - he just wants to be kind, he doesn't prefer that it be in one particular way. 
{I understand that at the level of this bias there's not yet a particular action. But how is that a kal v'chomer from not having a reason? Can't someone do an act of kindness without a reason? Perhaps: There's a particular kind of reason called an ulteror motive, and that you don't need. But a reason could also be an altruistic reason, like wanting goodness to be in the world. Either way, a reason is the most basic connection to reality. If he lacks even that, he (perhaps is like a dreamer [this fits with nekuda being iggulim of Atzilus] who realizes the beauty of the concept but) certainly doesn't have a connection to diffrent ways of actually doing a kindness. (And this applies also on the level of sfira, just that there the sechel could be contrived and can not influence the mida, as we'll get to in a minute.) V'adayan TzI"K.}
{See end of perek for alternative explanations which l'chora aren't correct, at least in so far as I lean towards R.W. if possible, but are interesting anyway [primarily the second one].}
 או גם אם שכלו מטה כלפי חסד דוקא
[7:54] Because of the point of chesed, also his chochma will be biased towards chesed. L'chora this is a division, a chochma of chesed. But the truth is that this chochma is also a nekuda, a bias, and not an actual sechel.
 אין בו התחלקות אופני' שוני' אעפ"י ששכל הנוטה בעצם לחסד ולזכות הוא בחי' חכמ' שבחסד העצמי אבל גם הוא רק בבחי' נקודה
[8:37] yes, you could find divisions, but it's the same point, he wants to be kind, so his sechel middos etc. all want kindness. But its still just a general bias, because right now there isn't a particular opritunity to do something kind, KaNa'L.
 וכן נצח שבחסד זה הוא בא בבחי' נקודה
Overcome anything which stands against the kindness. Right now he's not doing anything, so there's nothing to fight, but if there would be...
 ונמצא דגם שבחי' החסד העצמי הבא בגלוי כלול מי' רצון ושכל ומדות אבל אין בהם התחלקות ניכרת 
Technically, there's a division of ten sfiros in the nekuda, but you really can't differentiate them, because they're all the same point of chesed.
אלא כולן בבחי' נקודה א' והוא בחי' העקודים שעקודי' היו בכלי א'6 כו'
They're all in one vessel, all expressed in the same thing, this point that he wants chesed.
{Akudim, bands (everything in one band, one vessel) / nekuda
nekudim, spots / sfira
brudim, splotches / partzuf}

Part 2
{Now the Mittler Rebbe switches from discussing middos in a way of nekuda to tohu [I think I got that from R.W's book.], which has sfiros, but only in a way of sfira, not partzuf, as will be explained.}
 ולזה בחי' ע"ס דתהו הן בלתי מתיחדי' ומתכללי' זע"ז אלא הן זת"ז7 כמ"ש וימלוך וימת8 כו'
reffering to the kings descendaned from Eisav, who represente tohu.
 כמו רצון העצמי שבא בגלוי חסד הגם שכלול בו שכל כו' לא יתחבר עם רצון עצמי היפוכו הבא בבחי' הדין
Polititions, missionarys, etc base their views on a belief. They might bring it into the realm of intellect, and bring reasons, but really its not a true intellect, and no matter what you tell them they won't change their views, becuase its a one way intellect. It exists to propagate their views, not to investigate truth. This isn't bad - that's sechel's job on this level, to express your belief.
Also within a person, sometimes he will just latch onto one thing, kindness, and deny anything else. That doesn't work, gets taken advantage of, so says, "Ok, only gvura." Then that stops working, and so it continues, one at a time.
 גם שהוא כלול משכל הנוטה בעצם כלפי דין כו' כי אין להם כלי שיוכלו להתכלל בו ב' הפכי' כאלה וכמו שנראה בחוש מי9 ששכלו מטה כלפי חסד בעצם לא יוכל לסבול בשום אופן למנגדו שהוא מי ששכלו מטה כלפי דין בעצם
...
 (כמחלוקת ב"ש וב"ה10 וכה"ג
Couldn't agree, because based on nefesh, not sechel. But in k'dusha, so they acted according to the psak, whoever it was like. Their connection to torah was deeper then their leanings m'tzad the source of their souls. L'chora that's why this is in parenthesis.
 דגם שמנגדו יקשה עליו ולא יוכל למצוא טעם ישתוק
Because his view isn't based on intellect, rather on his perception, and the intellect is just trying to bring that perception into a graspable reason. Thats how it works in Torah, the struggle to explain to mortal intellect, because intellect isn't where it starts.
 אבל לא יוכל להודות ולחזור בו להתכלל11 בדעה שמנגדו כלל כו')
Because has their inyan based on their etzem, and "Elu v'elu vchu'", and they don't have to agree.
 אבל בחי' התיקון היינו כאשר המדה בא מבחי' נקודה שלה להתפשטו' חוץ מן העצמיו' רצון ושכל שבה 
[7:30] In Tikkun, the focus is not on "the goal", rather on how to get there. Travel: you have one destination, which is north. To get there, sometimes you have to go south. Like the short long way vs the long short way. {Story in gemara. A guy asked a Yerushalmi kid, "How do I get to Yerushalaim?" "Do you want the long short way or the short long way?" "Long short." Fine. He goes that way, and its really short - but than there's a wall blocking his path. The short long way was more roundabout, but he actually was able to get there in the end.} In Tohu, the only thing is the goal. But that could lead to a "long short way". In Tikkun, a person is willing to go backwords or come up with other desires, according to what's needed. "Short cuts lead to long delays." 
דהיינו כמו מדת החסד כאשר יולד הרצון ושכל להטות כלפי חסד לזולתו מצד שעשה לו טובה
His goal isn't to be the kindest guy, he's going somewhere else. But to this guy who was nice to him, he will want to be nice.
 ולא מצד בחי' עצם הטוב וחסד הבא בגלוי בהכרח מטבע הטוב שבעצמיות נפשו 
If his actions were based only on his etzem middos popping into existance, in a way of sfira, he would always be kind to everyone.
אדרבא יוכל להיות אכזרי בטבע ולמי שחננו והצילו ממות וכה"ג ירצה להטיב ויטה שכלו עליו תמיד לחסד וזכות וכו' וכה"ג
He connects his etzem ratzon to this guy, but how much is based on what was done. If someone did more things for you, or more important things, you'll want to do greater kindness to him. So it gets complicated, even to this guy not neccesarily at all times will he be nice. Murkav.


Part 3
שזה נק' חסד וטוב המורכב
complicated, a lot things to think about, based on situation.
 ולא חסד פשוט ועצמי שמצד הטבע כלל 
If it was m'tzad the etzem, it would be the same for everyone.
וכה"ג יובן בהיפוכו במה"ד המורכב להטות רצונו ושכלו כלפי חוב לשונאו שעשה לו רעה הרבה גם שבעצם טבעו הוא איש חסדן ורחמן כו'
So his being mean isn't a sign that he's a mean guy. It could be that he's really a very nice guy, but some people... If someone's acting according to his etzem chesed there's no limit. Even if some guy wants to kill him, he'll try to be kind to that guy. But if you connect to the deeper ratzon, there come limits, because really the source of tikkun is higher than tohu. For example, someone who loves his children, so he gives them lots of stuff, never strict - but that's a shallow kindness, doing things which the kid will appreciate as kind. But the pnimiyus of that desire to do chesed and be kind is that it should be for their benefit. Based on that, gvura can be mixed in.
 ועד"ז יובן שיוכל להיות במורכב כמה מיני אופני' שונים מאד לפי אופן דבר שמורכב בו המדות כמו אהבה ושנאה התלויים בדבר כנ"ל הרי יוכל למצוא דבר שמצדו א' יאהבנו ויהיה רצונו ושכלו הכל לטוב וחסד ומצדו הב' באותו הדבר עצמו ישנאנו ויטה רצונו ושכלו לרע ועונש
If based on sechel - there could be opposite sechels even about one person. Like drugs - they like them because of the good, and hate it because of the bad.
 עד שיוכל להיות בחי' ממוצע כלול מחו"ג יחד
Measure the good and part of it, and you end up with a compromise. Like business - profit good, expense bad. So you have to balance.
 כמ"ש באשר משפטו שם12 כו'
When he judges, you also find his mercy
 על שאול
this {principal} was said {applying to} Shaul. {Even though l'chora it's a general principle also.}
 שהמית את הגבעוני'
for helping Dovid
 ועל שלא נספד כהלכה דבר והיפוכו כא' 
There was a plague, because of what Shaul did. Hashem told Dovid to give over descendants of Shaul to the Givonim to be killed. At the same time, Hashem also told Dovid to give Shaul a proper hesped, which hadn't been done prior!
Because its not a giluy of an etzem thing that Hashem wants to punish or reward, or that Shaul is loved or not - it's according to a careful measure of what's happened and what's the best way to proceed, and so it's complicated. Or if a parent is angry at his child - it's not like he doesn't love him anymore.
וכן כשנשא שלמה בת14 פרעה ע"ז אמ' כי על אפי13 כו'
It says about that that Hashem was always angry about that.
 ושה"ש נאמר על שמחת בנין בהמ"ק15 וכמ"ש ביום שמחת לבו16 כו'
The "day of his heart's joy" is the day of the building of the Beis Ha'mikdash.
 שמחה וחרון אף דבר והיפוכו כא'
So... he was still angry because of the whole daughter of Pharoh thing, but at the same time he could still be, and was, very happy about the building of the Beis Hamikdosh. 
 וכן כי יצר לב האדם רע17 וכו' ומתחלה אמר וירא ה' כי רבה רעת האדם כו' וינחם18 כו' כמ"ש במ"א
Before, he said, "He's bad by nature - so destroy him". Then "... So don't destroy him", because it's not his fault. The same sechel can be a reason for two opposite things. Because before the bad couldn't be changed to good, now it can. That's the idea of the rainbow, beauty hidden in the light revealed {L'chora that's incorrect, rather the beauty hidden in the concealment of the light was revealed. Before, if something stopped the light, it stopped. Now, from that obstruction itself is revealed great beauty.} Before this didn't happen, atmosphere was thicker. Also in people, specificaly now there became a refinement withn a person, he can fight with the bad within himself and conquer it and reveal from that battle a deeper connection to Hashem.


Part 4
 שזהו מבחי' המדות דתיקון
These mixed emotions are an inyan of tikkun.
 שהם בבחי' מורכבי'
theory could be pure, but b'poel all is a mix. body: all these diffrent sences abilites in one body, soul: all sfiros in one place.
 דהיינו בהתפשטו' דבר שלא מצד העצמיו' לבד ע"כ יוכל להיות התכללות דבר והיפוכו כו'
theory: light is not dark. poel:always a limit on the light=darkness, you can make it brighter. Everything is a mixture.
 והיינו
{that we're going to talk about now}
 בחי' נקודה דתהו דגם כשנעשה בהתחלקות לי' אין זה רק ספי'
etzem of tohu - only one thing, but even when divided up to actually have subsfiros in a way of sfira - it's not really a division. Like chesed: in tohu/sfira, g'vura of chesed is turned into a servant of chesed. {whereas in tikkun it's an actuall g'vura, "like a father who punishes his son", or limiting how much is given according to the situation.} Someone who has a belief, and talks based on that. If he won't talk to you, that's an inyan of nikuda. If he'll talk, missionize, there's a sechel, but it's a one way thing, one sfira, no consideration of anything else. Sfira:makes himself like that's all there is. But in truth, there's other stuff, and he should be able to connect to all of them. Can't get to that, a certain roughness, because they feel that others are opposing them.
Tikkun needs a deeper look at reality. Middle kav. Two opposites, chesed and gvura oppose each other, have no connection. But then there's a Bar da'as, who has a deeper view, and shows both their deeper self, and how they don't really oppose eachother. Real inyan of chesed: every one has a bit of good, give'm a break so it could be expressed. Gvura - potential great, but if it doesn't come out to action who cares? bar da'as: both chesed and gvura want same, that should be good. So-what's the best way? By saying he's great, or terrible and has to do better? Depends on the person. Now, will do either, because you realize the main thing is that something good should happen. One level of tikkun like a public domain, people with opposite views can walk around in the same place and relate to eachother without killing each other. A deeper tikkun is where they can actually work together.
 ולא פרצוף אדם
"you're talking to a wall."
 שהוא בחי' ההתכללות מכל ההפכים כו' 
Inyan of person is that can see a deeper ratzon, and you can see how that is expressed in all these diffrent ratzonos. You might feel that this is a better way of going about it, but you can see where he's coming from, and that I also have a ratzon for that. Baal shemtov: if you see bad in someone else, its in you - people have commen goals, if you go deep enough you'll see that you have the same desire that he has, just revealed in a different way. For example, the goal of d'ra b'tachtonim. Two people: one focuses on the dira part, must be true, other says: but must be in tachtonim. one drops the goal in order to be able to do it, the other has the real goal but is never going to be able to do it, because he can't compromise. Very altruistic vs very practical. Tikkun is two work with both.


Part 5
{...והיינו בחי' נקודה דתהו דגם כשנעשה בהתחלקות לי' אין זה רק ספי' ולא פרצוף אדם שהוא
{that it, the partsuf adam, is}
 בחי' ההתכללות מכל ההפכים כו' }אלא בבחי' התיקון דוקא
{Is the partuf adam}
 שכל נקודה בא בהתפשטות חוץ מעצמיותה 
Its etzem is, kanal, a certain simpleness. Chesed is good, so I don't have to take into consideration anything else. A Bochur in yeshiva has that simpleness, he recognizes that Torah is true, and that Hashem is important to the exclusion of all else, and therefore he trys to do everything to the best of his knowlage, and is constantly going higher and higher in his avodas hashem. But when he goes out on mivtzoim, he can't tell people "Hashem wants you to do everything, if that means anything to you start doing everything now." He has to get out of himself, from his simple awareness, from the etzem truth in order to be be able to compromise. You start with something small, and go from there. But you don't drop the etzem, really you want that this guy should come to do everything, but - that doesn't work now, you have to take a trip to get there.
[2:00] It's the yetzer hora which demands perfection, all or nothing. Chesed of Tohu: Hashem will always love me, so I can do whatever I want. Gvura says "I"ll never be good enough to the degree that Hashem deserves, so why bother?" That's what Eisav, klipa of gvura, Xtianity says, that they can't be good enough, so they drop the whole thing and believe in this guy and it'll be good.
That's like a ratzo, a yearning for perfection, but it doesn't come into a shuv. But it's supposed to be that a person takes these etzem truths and allows them to fuel the practical. Chesed: No matter what I do bad - Hashem appreciates the good that I do. And Gvura pushes a person to always improve. The difference is that now he's focused on the practical and not on the ideal, he recognizes that doing something has value, even if it's not perfect. It comes down in shuv, tikkun.
שאז מתכללי' ע"י ריבוי הכלי' מכלים שונים שמורכבי' בהם כו' וד"ל
All the sfiros are being limited, so they can be combined.
 וזמ"ש בס"י טרף אש ומים19 ובללן זב"ז
The etzem of fire and water are opposites, physically and spiritually, to have a world they have to be combined, everything has a bit of both.
 דהיינו בחי'20 המורכב דאש ומים21 דוקא ולא בעצם מהותן כו' וכמ"ש במ"א באריכות:
Nothing is completely perfect or has no merit, everything is a mixture.


Addendum to Part 1
 ומכ"ש שאין בו בחי' התחלקות אופני' שוני'
{Perhaps it refers to the entire division into ten sfiros. A reason is the most basic connection to someone else (hergesh alert). If its just a blind obsession without any goal, there can't be a true division. "Gvura is telling me that the money will be used for bad? So what. I'm being kind, and his problems aren't going to stop me." But if I have a reason for my action then I can talk with gvura and not just go totally nuts, rather I can realize that in this instance maybe I shouldn't give, or should help in a diffrent way, etc.}
{Or perhaps we can say that there are two kinds of no reason. One is someone being kind who doesn't know why. But the reason he's lacking is more of a reason why he's giving of himself to someone else, why he's making himself uncomfortable, taking time away from things that he wants to do for himself, like learning torah or playing guitar. But he has a reason, an intellect, of kindness. He recognizes its importance, he's trying to do something good in the world. 
Then you have someone else who's taken away by the idea of kindness, but he lacks those reasons. So he'll dream his dreams, but if he lacks even this basic level of sechel, certainly there's no way he will be able to move himself to actually do something. V'adayan TzI"K.}


Addendum to Part 2
אלא הן זת"ז7
{Just wanted to record for posterity that R.W. surpised me with his dikduk, using the feminine zu, but then said, or "zeh tachas zeh." so close.} 