Chapter 15


Part 1
(טו) והנמשל מכל הנ"ל יובן בבחי' רושם שנשאר בחלל ומק"פ הנ"ל
The roshem - we were talking about the kav, but also about the reshimu, how could the kav come out from the reshimu? Kav is giluy, reshimu helem!
In a state of helem because its a heyuli, like a point, that anything could come out of.
Reshimu - that we look at the world and don't see Hashem, like looking at letters without seeing the light/wisdom they contain.
[2:27]
 (שהוא יו"ד דס"ג שבטה"ע כמ"ש בס' עמק המלך10 )
<kabbalistic>
Diffrent ways of spelling HAVAYA. In one spelling, whose numerical value is 63, the yud which is used to spell the second hey is a refrence to the reshimu.
Two removal of lights
1) Removal of the infinite light, which remains makif in a circle around the void
2) lessening of the limited light, which remains makif as a square
{A square implies a more revealed relationship, according to the level of the mekabel, as will be explained later}
This square is reffered to as being woven of letters. This is the measure of all that will come into giluy in the world. These are the four names A"B Sa"G Ma"H Ba"N, at the four corners.
Then the square was folded over, and the letters on one corner were hidden in the letters on the other corner.
But Sa"G has 9 letters, and the others have 8! So when Ba"N was matched with Sa"G, that last yud was left revealed.
And that is the reshimu.
Two reshimus:
First, in the middle of the circle makif.
Then, Hashem expands that point into a square, folds it in half, leaving a yud/reshimu revealed at the top corner of the circle, on the light, from where extends the kav into the makom ponuy.
And thats how the reshimu got from the middle to the top - we say left in middle, but then theres a kav, which comes from the light, which is {around including} at the top.
Tanya perek 45: "siluk ha'or l'tzad echad" - ?All sides! A: He's talking about the square makif.
More on the square makif in chapter 44 aprox. This is a parenthesis.
</kabbalistic>
[6:11]
 שהוא בחי' היולי כולל כל מה שיסתעף ממנו ע"י הקו"ח כו'
The kav isn't anything new - like a teacher explains, he can't explain something that he doesn't already know.
 וגם שנתעלם כללות האור11 העצמות עד שלא נשאר רק בחי' רשימו
Reshimu - that could be given over. Before, it was part of him, concealed, everything that he knows is included in a simple essence, that this is what he knows. Now, its been seperated from him, you can know it without being him or knowing everything that he knows {whereas before this idea is inseperable from the complete body of his knowlage}
Nimshal: Looks seperate, but really him himself, {like with the teacher, the idea is mamesh the same idea that is within himself}.
See him through the kav, from changes, order, like movement of body shows that the soul is there. At any moment, the body is just a thing. Through the combination of moments, change and movement, we see the soul. Also in world - we see changes in the world, a direction. And in one moment, we can see from contrasting the diffrent stuff. Or symbiotic relationships - squirrel's bury acorns, forget where. Plants trees. Not for self - forget! Hashem makes that want and forget, to plant.
Ants -  Hashem sends a cleanup crew to clean a mess.


Part 2
 עכ"ז
Even though there was a concealment to a reshimu
 ודאי הכל נכלל בו בקיצור עי"ז הצמצום דוקא כנ"ל
Because this tzimtzum isn't removing, its putting everything in, that this is what he is, that he will be {building on the previous discussion} a squirrel, his whole etzem being there. Like soul in body - you say that the body is you. But it isn't, its a piece of meat. But - similar with Hashem. Just as soul isn't trapped in body, hurting body doesn't damage the soul, Hashem isn't trapped in the squirrel. Still higher, revealing himself in. Why are even the highest spiritual levels any better then a squirrel? {Sovev, "Eem tzodaktah etc."}
[2:14]
So... M'tzad tzimtzum, for there to be giluy isn't a problem, because its all there.
 וגם מה שהוא מורה העדר ההתפשטות למטה
But its all there in a way that you can't take any giluy from it. Mishna - related to gemara, have something to work with. But creation - like if Hashem would have just made a rock. You'd never figure out creator etc. And the whole world is made in this way, that it looks totally seperate?
 אינו בחי' צמצום גמור
even this. This result, of concealment, isn't caused by a desire to conceal.
 רק מצד שהוא בחי' כח ההיולי כו' כנ"ל 
Someone can look at reality, think of a bunch of explanations. Or a word in another language - doesn't know what it means becuase it could have any meaning. Ink on a paper - no one can look at it and figure out the meaning of the letters, because that meaning isn't inherently there - that is a connection that is put on it. 
Also creation - nothing inherently reveals a particular thing about Hashem. {What we call kindness isn't inherently a giluy of Hashem's chesed}{And even the inyan of kindness doesn't inherently express Hashem - "Lo y'chalkilucha gam b'b'cheenas glif glifu etc"} . Its like a language -need order, context, kav. It itself, as it exists in a way of reshimu, could mean/express/reveal anything.
רק להיותו כח מגביל לכללות האור הראשון
Atzmus has no reason for existing. The reshimu, and reality which is drawn from that, which has the whole atzmus, gets that quality of not implying any reason or source.
"The complete yesh comes from the true yesh" - the feeling of independence from the reshimu is a giluy of the etzem.
 ע"כ בלתי מתפשט רק דרך קו לפי אופן ההשפעה כנ"ל.
The points could have any meaning, so there needs to be a kav, a particular order, to imply a particular meaning.
Reshimu letters of kadmon without light, apparent giluy. But infinite - like teacher has what he wants to teach, could teach it in any way. To him the whole wisdom is one point. has to add more points to draw it out in one particular way.


Part 3
 אמנ'
{Even though its only breaking through in a way of a line, and only can break through when like a line}
 יובן מהנ"ל
{From this that the kav is a heyuli to reveal, could reveal anything.}
 דקו זה יש בו מכח האור הראשון שלפני הצמצום בבחי' א"ס ממש רק שבא דרך קו לפי אופן המקבלים כו'
So could reveal infinite, but usually less according to mekabel. Like rov - has the depth of halacha. If someone asks him a din, he can tell them the din- or, if he thinks they're up to it, he can reveal to them the whole thing back to the gemara.
 ובזה יובן
{With this that kav has power of first light etc.}
 מ"ש באורך נראה אור12 בחי' הארה דהאר' הנק' אור של תולדה
{That} Light changes form after tzimtzum, but points to Hashem. {How could this limited thing point to Hashem?}
 שאחר הצמצום בוקע האור דרך קו בעלמא כו'
For example, see wisdom. Seems like an independent thing. But there is someone using wisdom, points to a creator. This is giluy coming through in a way of a kav, of connecting many points together. Spiders making web - where does that wisdom come from? Its not like they figured it out, its Hashem's wisdom.
Like if you someone being smart - you only see his intelligence, but you say "You are smart" - you see him being expressed through intellect. The light is breaking through in a way of a line through the point. {Understanding more of a person's ideas gives you a line, more contact, a greater realization of the person's intellect, and of the person himself. Just one idea looks seperate, but a few, you can look at them together and see the person behind the intellect.}
{Also a person expressing himself - there is a reshimu, his whole etzem in a single point, and then more points are drawn out. Just like in math there's algebra, calculus, etc - so to in giluy of person, theres chochma and chesed etc. These are all points. Through enough of these points, a line is formed, a giluy of the etzem to the mekabel in a measured, step by step way.
The etzem is in the reshimu, but the mekabel can't receive from it, because it could express itself in any way, heuli. Mekabel receives when the point is drawn out into points, one particular giluy. And the start is measuring what the mekabel can handle, the inyan of creating a system of giluy.}
 אבל הוא בא מאורך העצמי
{It would seem that this starts the biur of or shel tolda according to what we said that kav is heyuli etc.}
[6:34]
 להיות שברשימו הרי נכלל הכל וממנו נמשך הקו בבחי' היולי לכללות השפע
The one point could be anything. Add points to see one particular thing. But really - even that first point has everything, just can't see it because its a heyuli. But after the mekabel can see with the line, he can see the etzem in every point. Like language - really, every word and letter has intellect, but a heyuli - could mean anything. So add more, context, to reveal intellect. But then you see in every word wisdom, and really he puts his whole etzem into every word he says.
 להיות בבחי' מעלה ומטה עכ"פ
{Now, at the kav hamidah, a particular structure wasn't made, just the idea that there is a such thing as higher and lower, easier and harder etc and the ability to divide the reshimu accordingly, then later the mekabel is measured up and the giluy is put together.}
That an order is created, through which, step by step, you can reach the etzem. {Like the artificial division of math to higher and lower to reach the etzem sechel of math.} {Whereas before it was one thing to the teacher and, "Either you have it or you don't."}
 כמ"ש בע"ח
{Summary: Because kav has Ko'ach or harishon, understood nir'ah or, a born light, which is a giluy of first light, that even though limited, points to.}


Part 4
 ומזה הטעם יובן תירוץ על ב' ענינים הפכים שנמצא בקו זה הא' אשר בכחו דוקא לאכללא13 שמאלא בימינא14 כו' שהוא בחי' ההתכללות והיחודי' של כל האורות המסתעפים מכתר דא"ק עד מל' דאצי'
The orot - l'mashal the diffrent desires, from the most general to the most particular. The kav brings them together, that all of them are a united thing, an expression of you.
 עד שע"י דוקא יוחלף האור בכלי שאינו שלו כמו אור החסד בכלי הגבור' כו'
You can decide to express your kindness through being strict. Your not a machine; these diffrent parts really are just an expression of you. {Like when we talk about how the kav comes from the reshimu, many diffrent points and connecting them, all these points are an expression of the etzem. L'mashal, dividing up an idea into parts, every part is an expression of the idea. So if you feel the student would learn better by being exposed breifly to something way over his head, you can do that, because the points aren't independent things, rather they're expressions of the etzem sechel, and in this case the sechel is expressed through breaking the division set up by the line. Teaching is being expressed by confusing, just like kindness can be expressed through strictness.}
 כ"ש במ"א באריכות בענין וא"ו דוהנורא15 כו'
"Ha'godol Ha'gibor V'hanorah" - chesed, gevura, tiferes. Tiferes, middle, expression of kav, unites chesed and gevura. Vuv at the beggining. Norah - woundrous, this uniting is woundrous.
 והב' מה שנק' בשם קו המדה16 דוקא למדוד כל או"כ כו' וכנ"ל בענין הקו שנק' אמת הבנין כו' שזהו היפוך ההתכללות לכאור'.
So - does it make rules or break them? We'll answer that its the same thing - the one who can make the rules can also break them.
 אך הענין הוא דשניהם אמת ואדרבה הא בהא תליא משום דשרש זה הקו מכח הראשון דעצמיות אא"ס שלפני הצמצום הוא בא כנ"ל בענין באורך דוקא נראה אור דקו זה
This light is coming from him, its a giluy of him.
 ובכח האור העצמו' דא"ס17 ודאי יש לעשות בחי' התכללות ויחודים של כל ההפכים בכל ההשתלשלות מראש דא"ק כו' עד מל' דאצי'
He can do anything, and he sees that everything is one thing, a giluy of him, the essence of everything is him, so automatically even the limitations also could do anything.
 וכמאמ' אנת הוא דמייחד18 לון ומקשר לון כו' אנת הוא מלגאו ומלבר כו'
Specificaly atzmus, ant, can unite everything, because specificaly to the etzem the the inside and outside, pnimyut and chitzonyot, are the same.
 וכן ענין שם מ"ה מלגאו דאיהו אורח כל האצי' כו'
Road - uniting, all atzilus, ma"h, the pn'myus shem ma"h is kav, the soul, essence of atzilus, Hashem's choice deciding what happens, this unites all the diffrent sefiros of atzilus.
 וכה"ג הכל הוא מצד הארת אור העצמות דא"ס שבקו זה שהולך ונמשך עד למט' במל' סוף כ"ד1
[7:9]
 והיא הנותנת דוקא שיש בכחו למדוד מדה וגבול לכל או"כ ולכל יחוד משפיע ומקבל כמה יהיה מ"ד ומ"ן כו' מצד בחי' הרשימו המגביל לכל אור העצמו' באופנים שונים כמו ששיער בעצמות אא"ס לפני הצמצום כו'
Kav is his choice between or giluy and limited reshimu giluy. If making brighter comes from him, he can also make darker.


Part 5
[2:03]
 ונמצא מצד עצמות האור שבקו נק' בחי' היולי ליכלל2 ולחבר את הכל כו' ומצד כח הרשימו המגביל שבו מגביל שיעור ומדה לכל ע"ד אותו בחי' השיעור הראשון שנכלל ברשימו זו
"Al derech" - according to. 
 עד"מ אומן העושה רושם שמגביל האופן של המעש' שיהיה הכל מדוקדק כמו שהוחלט השיעור בעצמו שלא ינטה ימין ושמאל כו'
Moshul: he decides what he will do. Nimshal: that things look they're set. This allows avoda. Example: Class - have strict rules and standards, name written in certain way, date, etc. Doesn't really have to be like that, but teacher makes it like it has to be like that. Especialy for younger, to feel accomplishing, there have to be requirements.
[5:25]
 ואעפ"י שאם לפעמי' יהיה תוס' אור בנאצלי' יתר מכפי מאמר קו המדה כו'
That there will be a giluy, an inspiration in the person without the avoda which is normally needed.
 היינו מכח האור העצמו' דוקא שלפעמים יאיר כך ולפעמי' יאיר כך
Like teacher takes students to NASA, a giluy way over their head, not according to the seder, for a goal, to inspire etc.
Or kriyat yamsof - a crazy giluy totally beyond their level, or matan torah.
And sometimes their will be a concealment, the teacher will decide to punish, not teach etc - but what about the plan? His choice.
Two things: He made the rules so can break, and even the concealment is for the ultimate goal of teaching.
 ולזה הטעם כל בחי' התחדשו' אור באבי"ע הכל מעצמו' אא"ס שלפני הצמצום דוקא
Some teachers are like robots, make system and stick to it. To make change in the seder need to reach past that to them selves, and they can change it.
 דהיינו מפני שבאורו העצמי נראה אור בקו זה לפעמי' בתוס' ולפעמי' בגרעון
For example the architecht is taking from the blueprint. Could make it like an unchangable reality, but really the giluy is coming from him, he made the plan he could break it, he could change it if he wants by reaching into himself.


Part 6
 וכן בשינויי היחודי' שבכל הפרצופי' מא"ק עד עקב דא"ק בסוף העשיה3
Husband building house for his wife. She doesn't like a prat. Goes to builder - he can't, need to go to the guy in charge of building, he says go to the architect, he says go to your husband - no one can change anything without the etzem. And really there's no change in the etzem - he always just wanted his wife to be happy. Also us - we say in Shabbos davening, Hashem asked us before made the world, now we say we want something changed - "But this is what you wanted!" So even now - when we ask for a change it could be we really want it as it is, to change we have to want diffrent in a very deep way.
 כמו השינוי מזמן בהמ"ק לזמן הגלות וכה"ג 
That now we have to do a lot of work for very little in return, much less then would have been in times of Beis Hamikdosh.
ודרך כלל הרי א"א י"ר4 מלפניך מלפני עצמותך ממש שלמעלה מי"ס העצמיי' ג"כ
We can ask change from etzem, even before yachid. Yachid sefira of chesed, "Chafetz chesed hu" - we can ask to stop being chofetz chasad, "shfoch chamuscha al hagoyim"
 לשנות הרצון הפשוט שכבר נמשך בעצמו' האור דא"ס לבא בשיעור ששיער בעצמו עד סיום הקו באופן אחר
We can ask to change anything, even the simple goal, e.g. dira bitachtonim.
 כמו מדין לחסד וכה"ג וכנ"ל (בסוף אות הה'5 )
supposed to be chapter 9
 בענין אני הוי' לא שניתי בין רצון של חסד לדין באור הראשון שלפני הצמצום
Moshul of husband building house: still same desire to make his wife happy, just being revealed in a diffrent way based on what his wife wants.
And like we said in chapter 10, that the etzem is higher than just being a chafetz chesed, not trapped in that mida.
 מטעם הנ"ל (באות יו"ד) בענין חפץ חסד שבעצמות ההיולי שנכלל בעצמות כו' שיש בו ג' מדריגות עד שבא בדבר פרט כו' (כמבואר באריכות באות י"א)
So we see that its not something set - need all these tzimtzumim to get there. Eg guy is nice - how reveal that? This lower level, of giluy, totally doesn't effect the higher level. {Also yachid - revealed in certain sefira of yachid [kind of], a change over there doesn't make a diffrence to the etzem}
 וכשאמרו אליו ולא למדותיו6 מדבר גם במדותיו העצמיים שבאור העצמות
Eg if you give someone a whole sob story, obviously appealing to their being a nice guy (they're chafetz chased) - thats being manipulative, and it won't work. Just like taking his hand and reaching into his pocket to take the money without recognizing the person giving. Thats the idea of asking for a chesed chinam - that we recognize there is no force which makes him give anything, so we ask without any reason, appealing to the etzem.
 מפני שהעצמות דאא"ס לאו מכל אלין מדות כלל7 כו' וד"ל. וזהו אנת הוא דמיחד לון כו' אנת דוק' שזהו אנת הוא חד ולא בחושבן8 י"ס כו'
Etzem can unite them because higher, all of the sefiros are just him, that he limited himself to be revealed in chesed etc. He is kind, and he is strict.


Part 7
Ten, eleven: all goes up to etzem, all the same thing. Chesed, gevura - just me doing what I want. They aren't really diffrent; if I want I can do this, or that. Like we say b'pnimiyus evey jew is same. Have guy who only wants to learn chasidus, another wants mivtzoim, seem opposite, but really its the same thing, both are serving Hashem with their abilities.
[1:32]
 וכן מעצמות אא"ס דוקא בא כח הגבול והמדה אשר בבחי' רשימו שבקו שמחמת זה נק' קו המדה והא בהא תליא דוקא
Same thing - he can make the midah, and he can break the midah. {its just him revealing himself in diffrent ways.}
 (וכמ"ש במ"א בענין כללות חו"ג שבעצמות9 אור אין סוף שהוא בחי' כח הגבול להגביל ולהעלים בעצמותו בעילוי אחר עילוי עד אין קץ ושיעור והיינו אא"ס למעלה עד אין קץ10 כו'
Reshimu, the giluy is (kindof) totally gone. Just this point. Shake lulav, no reason. "Deeper intent, reason?" - not there. Hidden tottally within himself.
 ובחי' התפשטות האור למטה מטה עד אין תכלית שע"י הקו שנמשך מן הרשימו כו'
Which one chesed, which one gevurah? Both - relative term. Rebbe says maamer - chesed, giluy. But really gevura, he has to descend from his great level to our silliness. And opposite - goes in his room, hidden, for him a chesed, for us a tremendous gevura.
In general, there is a deeper etzem to everything in seder hishtalshelus. Often people are presented with levels and maps, makes everything very set and easier to understand. But that totally conceals the etzem, makes it look like a machine. This is a source for a lot of questions, "says diffrent things about certain levels etc in diffrent places" - The answer is that its not a set reality. Its put on. Not that its fake - a person decides to place a system upon himself. Its there, but a choice, so has both qualities.
 וב' קוין שקולין המה בבחי' א"ס
Both infinite - high infinitely, higher then sefiros higher than atzmus - "If you can name it he can go above it, and even if you can't."
 ע"כ גם בירידת האור דא"ס בקו זה שקולין ב' כחות הללו
Just like before has both, also now, that its according to the mekabel, can go in both directions. {Like we said that the kav has co'ach ha'aien sof.}
 לצמצם ולהגביל או לחבר ולייחד וכן ענין שינויי האור וההמשכה אם בתוס' או בגרעון כמו מזמן לזמן כמו מחול לשבת ויו"ט וכן מזמן בהמ"ק לזמן הגלות הכל בכח א' שקול שנחלק לב' קוין חו"ג הבא מכח ואור הראשון דעצמות א"ס כמו שהוא בעצמו בבחי' חו"ג כו' וד"ל) והיינו כמבואר למעלה (באות הי"ד) דקו לגבי שטח הוא היולי כולל ע"ד אותו האור וכח העצמי שבעצמות של המשפיע רק שבעצמות הוא בהרחבת הערך ביותר ובקו זה בא כח זה עצמו בבחי' הצמצום שפע והמשכה למקבלים כו' 
The teacher can see the whole thing that he is trying to teach as one infinitely simple point, or divide it up into an infinite amount of distinct points and explanations etc. When comes to kav, takes a particluar mix of these two according to abilities of mekabel.
וא"כ גם בבחי' צמצום והתפשטות שבו משם הוא בzא דווקא וד"ל:
There can be change, any change comes from etzem. Cashier: they could really do whatever they want, but send you to the manager. This is because according to the system the set up only the manager can make certain desicions. But in truth, the cashier has the ability to do whatever he wants, because he's a person, and as soon as he does something, anything, against the system, this shows that the whole thing is bogus and imposed and not a set reality.


Q&A
Part 1
Q) Why talking about squirrels, etc? This is really big stuff!
A) No. All of this is here, part of our reality. Point of this book: Hashem is right here, question is why we don't see him. We want to be able to see him in our coffe. Thats hisbonenus b'protis.
Q) Kav and reshimu - from before world was created
A) Yes - there general things that could come into anything - and also my coffee comes from them.
Example: Letters. This 'a' is a letter. Even though a letter is something very general which exists way before even this particular imoplementation of the concept, and forget about physical ink on paper - but this mundane stuff is a letter.
Before tzimtzum - Hashem could do anything, and in any form we see the whole atzmus. Reshimu - these same forms are revealed, but seen as something seperate. And beause everything comes through that, has that flavor to it. So squirrel - that idea of seperateness, of being an independent point, comes from the reshimu.
Also: We give five mesholim for reshimu. Rebbe Rashab explains in eter that only 1 is for reshimu, rest for how seems in the 4 worlds.
The squirrel isn't the reshimu part, rather the fact that it appears seperate.
Reshimu: Power of gvul, when appears seperate from power of bli gvul.
In teacher: That the idea seems seperate from his mind.


Part 2
Hashem coneals himself to give us bechira. Revealed in the kav, change that we see. All change comes from Hashem. Moshul: Person moves his pinky. That comes from him. Ha'orah, and ha'orah of ha'orah: Really soul only shines directly to brain, from there a ray of a ray to rest of body, and body influencing something else is ray of ray of ray.
Body: Made of cells, look to the lowest level there all just doing their own thing, not even an awareness that there's this bigger body that their serving. 
But if you step back a little bit, see that really the soul has complete control over everything.
Or any point where you step back, from atoms to molecules to proteins to cells etc - the lower things are seperate, why together? A higher thing bringing them together.
{This is an idea of choice/change, giluy of etzem.}
Sickness - when the smaller parts don't listen. Chasidus: Chasudim, gevuros, proper mixture needed. More chasudim, a certain liquid, then regenerate.