Chapter 18


Part 1
(יח) והנה בחי' רצון הקדום לעצמו
The desire is for himself, for what he will get, not how he'll get it. There is an inyan that the desire will be fulfilled through something outside of yourself, but at this point he's only thinking about himself having that taanug, not working with the outside in order to actually obtain it.
 כל מה שיהי' בהשתלשלות שכלול מי' עד בחי' סוף מעשה שעלה ברצון קדום זה שהוא בחי' אחרונה שבו הרי מבחי' מל' שבעליון נעשה כתר לתחתון23 כו' והוא בחי' כתר דא"ק להיות ידוע דבחי' א"ק נק' אדם דבריאה דרך כללות והוא בחי' המח' וע"י וא"א דאצי' נק' אדם דיצירה וז"א ונוק' אדם דעשי' כו'
General hishtalshelus: decide what you want, particurlar: get it.
 וכמו שהבריא' היא התהוות יש מאין ממש כידוע כך גם בחינת כתר דא"ק זה נקרא בריאה יש מאין האמיתי דאור א"ס עצמו שבקו הנ"ל הנק' רצון קדום לעצמו כו'.
ayin - poshut, beyond form, now in A"K its coming to be expressed in a form.
 וביאור הדברים ידוע להיות מבואר למעלה דרצון קדום הנ"ל הוא הנק' מקור כל הרצונות שהוא בחי' רצון ההיולי להיות ממנו נמצא מקור לכל רצון לרצון
[4:42] A"K: How you see yourself, and how you see the world in relation to yourself {how you [can] fit into the world}. For example, the desire for a home, for a certain taanug, becomes a desire for a house, and all the things that go into that, a job, etc. {This is based on someone seeing himself as a quiet guy who just does his thing. Someone who see's themselves as being free and unrestricted might translate his desire for the comfort of a home into a desire to live in a tent or trailor park. And even the quieter guy connects that self image to a house only based on what he see's in the world that a house is something which matches this image. But in another time, in another culture, they might translate their desires diffrently. For example, if they lived amonst nomadic tribes, a quiet comfortable existence might be from having a tipi and sleeping somewhere else every week, and unrestricted freedom might be from saying, "I'm tired of running, I'm building a house and planting tomoatoes, pineapple, and barley."}
An inyan of translating/connecting {, like a language} - for example, a baby has a certain pain, and then this becomes connected to a desire for food. On a more general level, in the level of A"K in a person, there is the connecting between his essential desires what in the world will provide that.
Ratzon l'ratzon, one desire is {translated as being} for another desire. You have a particular discomfort? A"K makes a desire for a desire, says that this desire to stop that discomfort  is a desire for sushi, it can be translated into that.
Someone who decides he wants to have a connection to Hashem creates an image of what kind of person he wants to be based on he see's in the world, and becoming that becomes his life goal. {Whether he decides to be a kolell guy for his whole life, or go on shlichus, maybe be a chasidishe baal ha'bus, and all of those things get more particular based on the time and place where he lives. All of theses three things have changed drastically in the last century, and in any particular time the particular image changes based on what place he is and what attitude is in that place and whether he searches for something else etc.} Which is what we say, that A"K is called the 70 years of a person's life.
Ratzon Hakadum: dira b'tachtonim
A"K: Y'mos Ha'mashiach, the image of what would be a perfect world, and on a more inner level, of the perfect person, Moshiach, "V'shuchanti b'socham", "And I will dwell within them" - within every Jew.
Alter Rebbe, a new soul. Just about everyone's soul comes from Adam's soul, which was a general soul. The moshul of a pit, that everyone is somewhat stuck in the current reality {, that they see the way things are, concealment, as normal}, even a "regular" tzadik to a lesser degree. But a new soul doesn't have those preconcieved notions of the importance of the current state of the world, he sees that this is a means to an end, he see's into the inner meaning and purpose of the current reality, so he's never stuck in a particular limitation that exists in galus {he never accepts it, rather he wants to leave all of these limtations behind.}. {Like in the moshul of the pit, where the people who have lived there for a long time see it as having a certain real-ness, that this is what life is like. Or maybe like the lion that lived in a small cage for many years, then even after it was given a bigger area to live, it never moved farther than the area that it was used to. It was stuck in that image of reality. But a new soul can see that the current limitations are just a means to an end, the cage isn't something we have to take for granted, there's a deeper reality that we have to try to get in touch with. }


Part 2
 ויובן זה ע"ד דוגמא מבחי' יחידה שבנפש האדם כשעצמיות חפץ חסד שבה שבהתכללות בבחי' היולי כולל כל מה שעתיד לחפוץ ברצון של חסד פרטי כו' כאשר בא ונמשך בדרך פרט לדבר א' ויוצא מבחי' העצמיות להיות לו רצון עצמי הנעלם שהוא בחי' רצון קדום הנ"ל אבל עדיין בלתי מלובש באותו הדבר כלל
A guy opens a door, sees a poor guy, and his heart goes out to him, he wants to help him {inyan of ratzon ha'kadum}. But the desire isn't enclothed, it can't yet express itself through helping that person, because he doesn't know how he could help him, what kind of help he needs, because he doesn't know what's going on. 
 רק שהרצון הוא לעצמו עדיין כנ"ל
His desire hasn't yet been connected to the physical world, right now it only exists within and is only connected to himself.
 אך כאשר מלובש ופועל רצון לרצון בדבר הפרטי הזה כמו שמתלבש ופועל רצון לרצון בשכל ומחשבה בדבר פרט הזה 
With his intellect and thought he gets an idea of what has to be done, and now his to desire becomes enclothed in bringing that image to reality.
הרי התהוות זה הרצון שבשכל ומח' לדבר זה הוא כמו התהוות בריאה חדשה ממקורו
Before, he didn't have a desire to give a coat, he had a desire to be kind. This thing of a coat is a new thing. Although really, it was also there {as is explained in chapters 10 and 11. But l'chora this is still called a new thing, and more particularly something from nothing, becuase within the etzem its completely included and unified and nullifed in the simplicity of the etzem.}
 והוא מפני שבחי' רצון קדום הנ"ל הוא המקור להתהוות הרצון לרצון הזה שבשכל כו'
And this desire wasn't over there {or at least, not distinguishable as having its own existence, that he wants to do that, rather it exists in a heyuli state, KaNa"L}, so now that it pops up its called a new creation.
 ונק' רצון לרצון זה בריאה שהרי אנו רואים שלא בכל העתים יהיה לאדם רצון לרצון פרטי
Even if the essential desire stays the same, the desire for a desire, the desire {which exists for} another desire, can still change.
 כמו הרצון במסחור או בלימוד
If he had an inner desire to make money {really it goes deeper than that, but we'll stop there for the sake of simplicity} and that desire became through translation a desire for a desire to toil in the business world, and then he got money, the desire for business leaves {unless there's a diffrent desire at play}, and similarly with a desire to learn. [5:30]
 שבהכרח יש מקור המהווה לרצון זה הפרטי ונק' רצון לרצון זה וממילא מובן מאחר שלא בכל העתים נמשך הרצון לרצון זה
{From being a general A"K desire, that because I want money I should really get around to working, to being a particular Atzilus desire , that I get offered a job and I accept it [kinda sorta maybe this is a keser thing]}
 וגם לפעמים יאיר אור רב ותקיף ולפעמים יאיר במיעוט וחלישות כו'
{Even if it has been drawn down into a particular desire, and even if he actually got a job,} sometimes he's really interested in the created desire for learning, business, etc, and sometimes he's less interested.
נמצא מוכרח שגם המקור העושה ומהוה לרצון זה הנק' רצון לרצון הוא ג"כ בא בבחי' התהוות יש מאין
The particular desire to do a particular business is not an essential desire, as we see that it's subject to change. If it was inherently important, than he would always want it, just like he always wants to be kind or rich. And if that desire is something non-esential and created, than also it's source, the general translation of "I want money" to "I want work" is something non-essential and created.
{But the ratzon ha'kadum's being the source for A"K doesn't mean that its not an essential desire, What's the diffrence? L'chora A"K is defined by what revealed desires it will allow to come out of it, like we've been saying that A"K says that the desire for a home becomes translated as a desire for a house. So if what comes out from it is non-essential, also A"K, being closely tied up with it, is non-essential. Which is not the case by the ratzon ha'kadum, it exists for itself, it is not defined by what is revealed from it. Whether A"K is in this form or that form never makes a change in the ratzon ha'kadum, you're still you - just expressed diffrently.
[Like someone who left home an unmotivated nobody and comes back a few years later as a respected Rabbi and wants to talk to his old freinds, but they don't feel comfortable around him. So he tells them, "I'm still me!" Despite his complete change, he's the same person he always was, the only thing which has changed is how that "I" fits into the world.]
But if the form in Atzilus changes, if he decides he wants a tipi unstead of a house, that could be a sign that there was a change in A"k, either his image of himself has developed or the world has changed.} {Yesh L'ayin ktazs the maaleh of this proof.}
Priorities.
 כמו השוחד שיעש' רצון לרצון ושכל לזכות תמיד מפני שהשוחד מגיע בעצמו' נפשו שמחמתו יומשך תמיד התהוות רצון לרצון של חסד וזכות ולהיפך לשונאו יתהווה תמיד רצון לרצון של דין כו' וכה"ג וד"ל.
Its like he's creating a language, except its a language for himself, he connects particular "words" {stuff in the world} with his more general and essential desires. This is the Briya d'klollis. Briya d'protis is a language to speak to others {explained later}.
Ratzon hakadum in a person: the basic phsycological needs of all people, independent of society and upbringing etc.
Water: three things theres the water, the word w-a-t-e-r, and the ability to connect them.
A"K creates a similar connection. He has a ratzon ha'kadum, and he has a "word", something seperate which could express his desire, and then A"K actually connects them, at least in a theoretical way. {If you're pennyless, its hard to be a generous philantrophist, despite your connecting your desire to be kind with the desire to support dozens of Chabad Houses}.
His knowlage of the world is the material, his ratzon ha'kadum is the idea that he wants to express, and the connection that this idea could be expressed in this manner is from A"K.
This is in the iggulim in yosher of every world - the iggulim is you, and the yosher is a translation of you to the world.
Or the soul as it is above the body, and soul as it is enclothed in the body.
Whats unique about A"K is that it's the most general and theoretical connection. The later ones get more particular, how to get something, changes based on whats going on right now, etc.
Called 70 years of a person's life, the desicions here effect his whole life. This is the first chance to make a mistake. Himself he knows, and the outside world he knows, but if he connects them wrong, this causes major problems.


Part 3
In a person, this is part of the soul's going into the body, and this concept is found again in the soul as it is in the body As soon as someone is born he starts trying to figure out what kind of a person he is, and how that can be expressed in the world.
What we understand/experience is the hishtalshelus as it is in the nefesh ha'chayunis u'bihamis.
Before the soul enters the body, it recieves a certain form, for example based on its purpose, what its supposed to fix up in the world. A problem can be that each soul only see's what it's supposed to do, it doesn't understand that someone else probably is supposed to do something diffrent. Eruv to mix private and public domain - private domain is that he has his avoda, and doesn't realize that other people have a diffrent avoda. {He has to have unity with the other private domains, an eruv.}
Derech Chaim - explains this is source of splits even amongst really holy people. We can bring an example from the Chasidim and Misnagdim. Yaa'vetz and Reb Yonasan Eibeshetz, the Gr"A and the Alter Rebbe, et. al. The diffrence was that Misnagdim were torah souls, and chasidim were teffila souls. And there's a place for both. The problem was the pirud, that the misnagdim felt that the less emphasis on torah was heresy {and not just that souls are diffrent.}. And then it got ugly.
A leader, a "Rosh Bnei Yisroel", is someone who can connect everyone, a general soul who can see how everyone else fits into one big picture.
If a person is raised/lives in a place where one particular derech in avodas Hashem is seen as being "it", he might feel like he has to be like that - but if he's not that kind of a guy, it's not going to work. And he might just give up, feel like this whole program isn't for him. He has to find his place, what kind of a person he should want to be. {Not everyone is supposed to be someone learning ten hours a day, or opening a chabad house.}
Teenagers, trying to find what they want to be and trying to be that.
Storys of tzadikkim, chasidim help create a self image, a role model, a goal, what you want to be like. Then we have maamarim to get to know what's going on behind the scenes in these storys. Its easy to do the stuff, but you want to go deeper, to be that kind of person, not just do that kind of thing.
A"K: Chitzonyus - which world will be the dwelling. Pnimiyus - Torah and Mitzvos, how to get there {?}. In A"K is where you first have the inyan of a neshama as a created being. Before its a chelek eloka, and in A"K it gets a particular form based on its particular mission.


Part 4
 וידוע דכל רצון גלוי כלול מי' א"כ גם הרצון לרצון זה כלול מי' ויש י' כחות ממילא יש י' מיני רצון לרצון שמתהווים כולם בבחי' יש מאין כו'
A person has to see how all of these things express his desire.
 וכ"ז דוגמא להבין בבחי' ע"ס דא"ק שכללותם ענין רצון לרצון לבד שהרי הן בחי' ההעלם דע"ס דאצי' שבגלוי כידוע וכמו כתר דחכמ' דאצי' שהוא הרצון שבשכל כו' שרשו בכתר שבחכמה דא"ק שנק' רצון לרצון זה וכן כתר שבחסד דאצי'
The desire to create something
 מכתר שבחסד דא"ק כו'
That Hashem decides that he could be expressed through creating, by being a creator.
 ואמנם התהוות ע"ס דא"ק עצמו הכל נמשך מבחי' הקו
Like we said earlier about a teacher choosing how he will go about revealing his sechel in general, making a seder of which idea is more/less difficult, etc. So A"K comes from Hashem's choosing to reveal himself in such a manner. {?}
 שנק' מקור התהוות כל רצונות לרצונות כו' להיותו עצם הרצון הפשוט שקדם בעצמו שיהיה כך כנ"ל
{Implies that kav mentoined earlier is in fact a refrence to ratzon ha'kadum, contrary to what Rabbi Walters says. VTZ"I.}
 ע"כ הוא פועל ועושה רצון לרצון בדרך פרט והוא מבחי' כתר דא"ק עד בחי' מל' שבו שהוא בחי' רצון לרצון דמלוכה כו' ואמנם רק מבחי' אחרונה שברצון הקדום ההיולי הנ"ל נעשה בחי' כתר דא"ק
His desire doesn't have to be expressed in this way, it could be in a different way.
For example, someone wants to be the rich guy with the fancy house. In America, he wants a mansion, in Africa this desire might be revealed as wanting two huts and a few cows. Israel, they use stone, to keep cold, and in America insulation, to keep warm.
The desire could have any form, this is just one. {So we describe it as being from the lowest level of iggulim.}
 שהוא רצון לרצון הנעלם
The desire to create this form of A"K.
 שלמעל' מחכמה שברצון לרצון הנעלם כו' ועד"ז כל עשר ספי' דא"ק הכל בבחי' ההעלם ורצון לרצון לכל ע"ס דאצי' שבא בבחי' גלוי כמו שיתבאר וד"ל:
"everything is in a way of concealment." - Its not something which you conciously think about. Like a language, you aren't always thinking about every word in the language. But when you want to say something, the idea is attached to those words. Similiarly in A"K - there's no concious desire, its's just that if you have this ratzon, this is how that's translated into the world. Home becomes house, down to the particular form of the perfect house. This image becomes set up already when you're a little kid, except it only becomes revealed a little bit later.
Like Coke advertising, they want you to connect quenching thirst with coke. Then when your thirsty, that connection is revealed as a desire for Coke. Even before you were thirsty the coke-desire was there, it just wasn't revealed yet.

וזהו שבחי' א"ק נק' אדם דבריאה כו' כמו בחי' התהוות יש מאין כנראה בחוש שהתהוות הרצון לרצון לעתים מיוחדי' הוא בא כשאר התהוות איזה מציא' כו'
{LIke was explained earlier}
 והוא כמו התהוות המח' שהיא התהוות יש מאין לגבי עצמיו' הרצון שבנפשו
כנראה בחוש שהרצון לרצון הבא בבחי' התהוות כנ"ל תחלת התהוותו במח' דוקא כי המחשבה בחי' כלי לרצון שהרצון מתלבש במח' כמו וחשב לעשות1 כו'
 וכן תחלת התהוות רצון לרצון במח' הוא שנק' רצון שבמחשבה כו' וזהו כללות ענין כח"ב דא"ק
{it is this beggining of thought}
 שהוא בחי' התהוות פעולת אור רצון לרצון דרך פרט
{L'chora: There is the light, the inner meaning and importance of whats going on in A"K, and there's the way this light is expressed, the particular image. The particular image is reffered to here as being the action of the light of A"K. The Mittler Rebbe writes that "It", this thought which is the intellectual sefiros of A"K, "is the creation of the action of A"K's light", the start of the formation of the particular image.  VTz"I.}
The intellect of A"K create these associations. The pleasure for a home's being connected to a house results in middos, that I'll have diffrent feelings towards diffrent things depending on how they effect the distance between me and my dream house, 
 שבא
{Which this particular image comes}
 במח"ס2 כו' משא"כ בבחי' הקו עצמו שלמעלה מבחי' פעולת התהוות רצון לרצון לדבר פרט במח' סתימאה ג"כ כו' רק לעצמו עדיין חושב כל מה שיהיה כו' שכולל במחשבת עצמו עדיין ולא בהתהוות רצון במח' שחוץ ממנו כלל וד"ל (ובל' הרמב"ם היינו בידיעת עצמו ולא בידיעה שחוץ ממנו וכו' וכמ"ש במ"א3 ): 
