Chapter 10


﻿Part 1
י) ומעתה 
It was explained in the first nine chapters  a) the need for hisbonenus b) how to be misbonen - you need a detailed knowlage, of the entire seder hishtalshelus, and reach the point in that you realize that it's all really a transpartent means for G-d to be in the world, and doesn't conceal or block chas v'shalom the Divine presence in the world whatsoever.
Than he concluded that not everyone knows enough to follow those two points of advice, and it's hard to piece the required knowlage together from the different places in chasidusm, so he will write this, the rest of the sefer, from chapter ten to the end.
So - "Now that it was concluded that this explanation needs to be given-"
הנה יש להבין דרך פרט בכל ד' עולמות דאבי"ע דהיינו
what does it mean all the details?
בכל פרטי ענין ע"ס דאבי"ע או"כ והתלבשותן זב"ז
how the lights go into the vessels
 בכל פרטיהן
what does it mean all the details?
 גם בכל ספי' שמתחלקת לפרטי פרטיות כמו גם בבחי' חסד דמל' שבחכמ' שבמל' דחסד וכה"ג וענין יחודם והתכללותם בבחי' הכתר שבכל עולם
Yichudum: keser unites them, and when keser is revealed it causes unity.
V'hiskalelusom: that keser is higher than them, such that when you have it you have everything; that all the other stuff isn't new, just kesser in kelim.
 שהוא בחי' הממוצע24 בין עולם העליון לתחתון הימנו כידוע הכלל דרך קיצור שמבחי' מל' שבעליון נעשה כתר לתחתון25 עד רום המעלות.
This is true up to the highest levels. This is why the creative process is called a chain: the highest part of the lower level wraps around the lowest part of the higher level.


Part 2
Untill now, the Mittler Rebbe provided us with an introduction to everything that will be explained. Now he introduces this chapter, which will discuss what was going on before there was a tzimtum.
 אך הנה מתחל'
Berfore we get into all the stuff that exists and the process through which it was created.
 יש לכל מתבונן להתבונן במקור הראשון הנק' מקורא דכולא26 
Why? Because we don't want to see it as some sort of a machine. Its all just a גלוי of ה, just that with all this diffrent stuff it seems like a whole hishtalshilus thing. But what we really want to do is connect everything back to the first source. And in order to do that we have to know what the original source of everything is.
שהוא בבחי' עצמות אא"ס שלפני הצמצום הנק' מקום פנוי הנ"ל
It's not the first tzimtzum, so he specifies that he's reffering to the tzimtzum called "the empty place".
 גם שם דרך פרט דוקא
Also this, just like everything else, has to be understood in a detailed manner. Which seems a bit strange at first glance - how could that possibly work? Before the tzimtzum there is only Hashem himself, and He isn't comprised of different parts. What details are there to think about?
 והוא הנק' מאריך באחד27
We see that it's even a thing in nigleh! Because you can't really extend the recitation of the word "echad" so much; doing so changes the word. Rather, the simple nigleh halacha of saying "echad" is to extend it a little bit, and then to be maarich in thought about the ultimate oneness, thinking about it at great length, meaning going over the details. (See first chapter.)
 באחדו' הפשוטה דוקא
It looks like a paradox, an impossibility. How could there be details of a simple unity that would necesitate lengthy thought?
Where does this length and detail come from if it's simple?
 ונחלק לג' מדריגות דרך כלל
And now suddenly there are three levels in this simple unity!
 ובכל א' כלול מי"ס
And now 30!
 והוא יחיד ואחד28 וקדמון
Original, origin, needed for other things to be able to exist.
 והכל בבחי' עצמות אא"ס שלפני הצמצום הראשון הנ"ל
Don't worry: the tzimtzum was only mentioned earlier, the explanation will be later, in chapter 12.


Now the Mittler Rebbe begins an explanation of these three levels. After a breif explanation, he will give us several analogies, and at the end of the chapter he says the nimshal.
 בחי' יחיד משמעו לבדו ממש
For example, a refrence to an only child means that there aren't any other children. A refrence to one child doesn't have that explicit implication. It could imply that there are more, only that now we're just talking about one of them.
Even when one is being used in a way that looks similar to being alone, for example, "This is my one child", it still isn't as alone as, "This is my only child." The one, even in that context, implies that right now, due to time constraints, he has one child, but in a little bit longer G-d willing he'll have many more. Wheras when someone refers to their only child the implication is that they aren't haveing, or don't think they're haveing, any more.
An only child isn't someone who doesn't have another sibling yet; it's someone who (at least conceptually) has no connection to the concept of haveing a sibling.
(I don't have the slightest idea why I just spent so effort on this totally random moshul.)
 והוא למעל' מהתאחדות נפרדי' שנק' אחד29 כידוע
The word echad is related to the word achdus. There could be two usages of the word "one": A) "This is number one", the first- and after it there is a second and a third. B) It's one thing, but it's made of parts, like 1000, or one car. Yachid is neither of these.
A car is one thing with many parts. If you are missing a part, it's not really a car anymore, it's a pile of junk. It's not it's not own, independant thing, rather it's what you end up with when you connect a particular bunch of stuff. "Yachid" implies a purity, like pure olive oil, which is only oil, no other ingredients. (At least there aren't supposed to be any...)
Allthough in truth, everything physical has parts; there are different carbs, atoms, nothing is really yachid - even spiritual things! Only ה has this ultimate level of yachid.
 ולפ"ז
That yachid is higher than echad, and that ה has this unity in a way of yachid. 
 בבחי' העצמות ממש לא יתכן לומר עדיין ענין ע"ס כלל וכמו מל' דא"ס שממילא מובן שקדם לזה בחי' כתר וחכמ' כו'
In order for there to be speech, there needs to be thought and desire. So how can we say that there is malchus of Ein Sof? That means that there's all this other stuff!

How can we talk about sefiros in the atzmus? Some places we say there are, in others we say that there aren't (which l'chora makes more sence)?
 ובאמת גם בבחי' העצמות דאא"ס שנק' לבדו כלול בעצמו י"ס אך שנק' חכי' ולא בחכמ' ידיעא כידוע עד ולאו מכל אלין מדות כלל30.
But how does this answer? "There are sefiros there, but there not like your sefiros". But if they're there - they're there, and how could that fit with the reality of yachid?
We're trying to explain how that's the source; in what manner is creation found there? And in general, nothing exists besides for ה - so where did all this stuff that I'm looking at come from? How can complexity be a גלוי of simplicity? Thats where this perek comes in - how this is a giluy of ה, when it seems to be the opposite.


Part 3
 והענין הוא דבאמת כמו שעצמות הא"ס הוא אור פשוט בתכלית הפשיטו' כך ממש בחי' אורו וזיוו הנק' אא"ס
so yes - the source of the light is simple, so of course the light is simple - that's the idea of light, that the luminary is revealed as it is
 דהיינו הוא ושמו בלבד כנ"ל
There's just him, totally simple, and the revelation of himself to himself, which is also totaly simple. {Biur b'derech efshar: There are many names, for example Kayl reffers to chesed and Elokim to gvura. And all of them reveal one aspect of himself in a very small way, like a name, which isn't quite as important as the person behind it. ("The man behind the legend." Of course, sometimes the name is greater than the person. But that's not what's going on over here.) Here though, we're talking about the small revelation of the inifinite light before the tzimtzum. L'chora this is also just a name; what makes it special is that it's sh'mo, his name. The other names are only the name of one small thing, for example chesed, and therfore woudn't be expected to have all the properties of the Atzmus. But this name would. It's a revelation of himself, albeit in a small way, a ha'aro b'alma. So just like He is completely simple, also this name, this light, is completely simple.}
 והוא הנק' טה"ע
Just Hashem and his name alone, nothing else at all. And the lower purity is after the tzimtzum, at a point where everything is seen as revealing him - seperate, but connected.
 שזהו ענין ובחי' התגלו' אור עצמותו כמו שהוא דוק' והוא הנק' יחיד שאין עוד מלבדו לומר בו לשון התאחדות
That they stay seperate, but work together. Like achudus amongst Jews - we have our diffrences, but still love each other and work together.
 או לשון יחוד
Become one thing - like when parents have a child, they become one (not to the ultimate degree, but a certain extent).
But at this point you can't say either of these relationships, because its only Hashem.
 וזהו אנת הוא חד31 ולא בחושבן
"... and not with a calculation." What calculation would you have made?
 י' כו'. 
The Arizal explains you would have thought that he is 1, but made up of ten sefiros {like was explained earlier about echad, 1 car, etc.}. So we say no, we mean a 1 not made up of 10, it's just Hashem.


So - there's nothing there, simple. But we also say that there are sefiros there.
אך מה שאמרו חכים ולא בחכמה ידיעא כו' שיש עכ"פ חלוקי מדריגות חכים ומבין חסדן ורחמן כו'
How can we say this? Even if not like ours, but we're saying that there's something!
The explanation of this quote is that you can't even say that the chochma over there is a chochma, rather chochma can't be diffrentiated from bina.
So if its not there in a way of chochma at all and there's just Hashem, why do we say that it's there?
 הכל לא מצד עצמותו רק מצד מה ששיער בעצמו בכח מה שעתיד להיות בפועל אחר הצמצום הראשון הנ"ל
Because he made a world, and the world has these divisions, we say they came from him - but in their source they aren't seperate one from the other.
When we say they aren't there, it's because Hashem is totally beyond that stuff, you can't say that there's a thing of chochma etc. At that level of essence, the chochma and bina are the same thing. {Later we'll bring mashulim for this, such as how all of the movements that a person could make exist as one simple essence within the ability to move within the soul.}
The essence of both is just Hashem. And really the whole hishtalshilus is an artificial thing, we want to look past it and see the etzem, that everything is really just Hashem. But to do that , we first have to look at all the diffrent things and understand them and see how and why they're different. Only then can we go past that and see how really there are no diffrences and find the etzem. {It's silly to think that you can say, "That thing which I don't know what it is - is really a revelation of Hashem." First you have to know what you're looking at, than you can try to see how really that's just a giluy Elokus. Of course, everyone has to start with a simple belief, but that isn't sufficiant for the avodas hamochin that will actually change you in a practical way and that Chasidus demands.}
Like oil - floats above everything, but also permeates everything. Also the essence: beyond all of these things, but goes into.
Or like it says in the Tanya that to say Hashem is so great that you can't understand him is like saying an idea is so great that you can't grasp it with your hand. It doesn't mean anything; it's not a praise; it's just silly. But-

But then we say that they are there. 1) "Not there" doesn't mean that Hashem isn't smart ח"ו, that he's missing chochma etc, rather it means that he's much greater than that. 2) When we say they are there, it's because Hashem could come into wisdom. He is much greater than that, but automatically he also does have wisdom. 
We see wisdom in world. It needs a source, Hashem. On the one hand - he has wisdom, the wisdom down here came from him. But as the wisdom exists in its source, it can't even be reffered to as wisdom, it can't be diffrentiated from anything else, it "exists" {and really even those quotes should be in quotes - it really does exist there, except that it doesn't. Over the course of this chapter that last sentance will make sence.} over there in a much more subtle, eidel way. 
That's the discussion in this chapter - an essence is completely simple, and at the same time includes all the parts, and can express itself in anything, because to it they're all the same.
So the essence is beyond all, but found in all, and "a piece of the essence is the whole essence", so in any prat you can find the whole etzem!

This is the general path that is taken in this chapter and through out the rest of this book. First, to see how this prat doesn't define Hashem, that he isn't this, that there is something beyond it. Then, when you connect to that deeper etzem, you can put that back into the prat and see how really the essence of that prat is just Hashem.
Like chochma - first you have to realize realize that chochma isn't the ultimate thing. Hashem is much higher than that; He is not wisdom or love etc. But then you have to see that this entire thing we we call chochma is nothing but a giluy elokus.
We'll go through this process in detail throughout the book, here this concept is found in a very refined, general way, because even the sefiros that we're putting through this process to begin with have a very refined existance.

Chapters 10-13 are the primary discussion of this in a general way. From chapters 10 and 11 we develoop an understanding of how Hashem is beyond everything, then 12&13 explain how that "everything" which looks seperate really isn't seperate. 
The rest of the book gets into how we find this in all of creation.


Part 4
B'kitzur - Hashem is beyond everything, but because stuff exists here, must be that it is also found in Hashem, the source of all of this stuff. But it's not actually there.
(וכמ"ש במק"מ32 בל' האריז"ל עצמו ומבואר במ"א באריכות)
People might ask how can we discuss what is before the tzimtzum? That's not allowed! The Mittler Rebbe answers that we also find in כתבי אריז"ל this discussion, in מקדש מלך.
 וזהו ענין כללות המאמר הראשון שבזוהר
in some editions, others a bit later
 בריש הורמנא33 דמלכא גליף גליפו בטה"ע
Hurmana - can mean either rule or desire. Here uses both meanings.


First, he explains what this zoharic pasage means.
 פי' בעצמות גלוי אורו הפשוט הנ"ל שנק' טה"ע 
The revelation of Hashem, as he is, to himself
 גליף גליפו שהוא ענין חקיקת אותיות 

Then, he emphasizes two points in this zoharic pasage which seem to contradict each other, as per the paradox that this chapter struggles with.
 ובריש הורמנא שזה כשעלה ברצונו הפשוט הוא בחי' כתר ובחי' האותיות שחקק הוא בחי' המל' דאא"ס וא"כ יש ראש וסוף כתר ומל' גם בבחי' עצמיות אא"ס
So it would seem that also in first maamer of zohar says there are sefiros in עאא"ס!
What we explained before explains this also.

 וביאורו שעלה במח' ורצון הפשוט אנא אמלוך והכל בעצמותו עדיין קודם ענין מה ששיער בעצמו בכח דוקא כל מה שיהיה לו רצון למלוכה בגלוי
Even before the measure, he has the desire.
  והוא
What he actually reveals based on this pre-tzimtzum measure. (The ana emloch and the measuring reffrenced here are both before the tzimtzum.)
  אחר הצמצום הנק' מק"פ כו'
He measured, or estimated, exactly what would be after the tzimtzum, so it must be that even before this measure (which will be explained towards the end of the chapter), he had the ability to create, and was therefore (even before the measure of exactly how his ruling would be revealed) able to decide "I will rule". {Now, the exact meaning of "I will rule" is obviously a very eidle inyan. It's not like a deep baritone burst forth from the void and boomed, "I will rule." After studying this chapter, maybe you'll have epes a hergesh. B'chlolus al kul panim, there's some sort of an inyan of a descision before the tzimtzum.}

This was all so far an introduction to topic of this perek. The Mittler Rebbe brought sources which imply both sides, maybe there are sefiros, maybe there aren't. The answer, which will be explained here, is that His relationship to the pratim is {like} a heyuli relationship. This idea of heyuli will be explained at length. In short, it's a higher essence which includes in its simplicity all that comes out of it.

We said that the sefiros come out from him, so it must be that he has them, just that there they aren't in a way of ten sefiros.
For now these are only words; now he'll flesh it out with analogies to give a better הבנה.


Part 5
והדמיון בזה ידוע מכחות הנפש בהתגלות מרצון עד המעש'
Giluy from soul is similar to giluy from yachid; it has within itself everything that it will ever reveal, but at the same time...doesn't.
שישנם כולם בפרט בהעלם אור עצמות הנפש שנק' בחי' יחידה
Hidden within his soul are all these diffrent כוחות.
 כמו ע"ד דוגמא כאשר האדם הוא חפץ חסד וטוב להטיב בדבר פרט
Imagine a cold day. Our hero, Mr. Big, is relaxing at home when a poor guy shows up. Mr. Big takes care of him, gives him a hot meal and a warm coat and a few dollars.
 שזהו בא מצד שיש בו מדה זאת דחפץ חסד וטוב בבחי' עצמות נפשו הנק' יחידה
Why did he do this nice thing? Because he's a nice guy. This midah is in his etzem which is called Yechida.
 ע"כ בא חפץ חסד זה בגלוי מן העלמו
If he was mean, he wouldn't have given the guy the coat.
 ומוכר' לומ' בוודאי שחפץ חסד זה בעצמות נפשו הוא בבחי' כח היולי בעצמיות 
This faculty exists whithin himself in a way called "Heyuli". A Heyuli is an essence, it's simple, has no form, and therefor can come out as anything.
לכלול כל מה שעתיד לחפוץ בחסד וטוב בכל פרטי פרטי העניני' שיבקשו ממנו
He is kind, and that one simple faculty of kindness is the source for all of the different kind things that he does.
Back to our story: The guy who got a coat meets a friend who needs shoes and tells him to go to Mr. Big. His freind asks, "But I don't need a coat, I need shoes!" This is a mistake.  Different ways of being kind aren't different charachter traits. You wouldn't say about someone that, "He's such a great guy! He has a coat-kindness, a shoe-kindness, and even a sandwhich kindness!"
 וא"כ בהכרח שקוד' שעלה ברצונו וחפצו זה שבגלוי להטיב חסדו בדבר זה הפרטי היה כלול בעצמיו' חפץ חסד ההיולי
Even before he did a particular kind deed, his being kind means that there are a ton of particular things he would do in all sorts of situations. So all those different things are part of his being kind.
 ויצא מן ההיולי להתגלות בדבר פרטי זה
So we see that this thing of kindness includes everything. If one thing is missing, it's not kindness, it's a foundation. Like a foundation that gives out coats - its not really kind, its just a machine. Someone can be starving on the door step, but they don't give out food, "they only have a coat kindness" - its not a kindness. It was started by a nice guy as a way to be nice, but it doesn't have that essence of kindness anymore. It could be that a person has a certain reason why he doesn't want to give food - but מצד his being kind, he has to also have this desire, it's just that other considerations prevent that aspect of his personality from being revealed.


Part 6
 ואנו רואי' שיש בחפץ חסד זה שכל וחכמה ומדות ומחדו"מ
He has to figure out what this situation needs. For that he needs sechel.
Also, there is a kind way of thinking, finding merit in others and reasons to be good, unstead of justifying why he doesn't have to do a kindness.
And a חכמה, to come up with an idea how to help this guy.
And emotions - a dislike for things that oppose this kindness. For example, if someone wants to be kind to help the poor, he will have a hatred for poverty and its causes. And he will have to over come obstacles which prevent him from being kind, which is an inyan of נצח, etc. 
And speech is involved, e.g. to ask him what he needs etc, and finally, there has to be action, in our example, to give him the coat.
 א"כ
That when the kindness is revealed it expresses itself through all these different ways {, and if any of these things were lacking, it would mean that his faculty kindness is not what is being expressed}.
 ודאי במקור חפץ חסד זה בהעלמו כשהי' כלול בעצמיות החפץ חסד ההיולי ג"כ מהתחלקות שכל ומדות ומחדו"מ שבו
That being kind he knows automatically how all this other stuff works.
 אבל בבחי' עצמיות חפץ חסד ההיולי כמו שהוא קודם שבא עדיין בדבר פרטי הגם שבודאי גם שם יש התחלקו' שכל ומדות כו'
ie if your a nice guy, you need to have a kind intellect and emotions, otherwise you aren't a nice person. {Even though you hopefully still do nice things, and that's very good, if it's not accompanied by this it shows that your doing those kind things is an expression of personalaty traits other than chesed. So such a person can't really be described as being kind, insofar as his acting in a kind manner isn't a sign of a kind, loving personality. For example, someone who is asked by a poor person for charity and grumbles about lazyness and irresponsiblity, but gives him the money because he feels that he has to. This is more gvura, discipline on himself, than kindness.} Feeling of "this is the right thing to do", not that this poor guy has no right or reason to my time or money. So the heyuli kindness must have these, because if they don't come out its not חסד.
 מ"מ כלולים ומתאחדי' בתכלית
All he has is the heyuli chessed, and that includes everything automatically. It's not a bunch of diffrent things which he has to be carefull to mantain.
 וכמ"כ במדה פרטי' אחרת שבעצמיו' כמו מדת הגבור' והת"ת והנצח וכה"ג
Gevura - eg this need for justice expresses itself {or at least wants to express itself} in all situations.
And netzach - wants to win everything. {Like we explained about chesed, that if his "chesed" only wants to be kind in particular situations, it's not a chesed.} {Also, like explained earlier, he has free choice; he can choose not to allow his trait of netzach to be expressed in every situation. But m'tzad that trait, he always wants to win. As we would expect to see by someone who is consumed with that trait.}
 עד בחי' המל' שהוא מדת ההתנשאות שכלול בודאי מי' רצון וחפץ למלוכ' וחכמה ומדות ומח' כו'.
A lot goes into being a king, having this thing of kingship must contain within it all of these things.


Part 7
Example- Napolean. Eventually, he did all the particular things that go into being a ruler. And even at birth, it must be that he had that king thing, and the proof is that he did a pretty good job of it. But at that point, the king-liness was completely simple, without definition; he didn't know anything. This is what he's about to say.
 אך קודם שבא לבחי' התגלות בדבר פרט כמו למלוך על מדינה זו וכה"ג כלולים ומתאחדים בתכלית בבחי' מדת המלוכ' ההיולי' העצמית
In this essential thing that he's a leader. It might not be revealed, but that doesn't mean that it isn't there.
 כמו בעצמו' חפץ חסד ההיולי' הנ"ל
That the kindness has all the coats and shoes, but is higher.
 וא"כ
If so that being kind doesn't mean having all these details actually there, rather just a simple part of identity, of who you are, etc.
{The notes over here are as best as I can understand R.W's shiur. See end of chapter for a different possible explanation of this "If so, than it is automaticaly understood."}
 מובן ממילא שבחי' מדת העצמיו' דכח"ב וחג"ת ונהי"ם ההיולים שבעצמיו' הנפש לא יתכן לומר גם לשון זה שמתאחדי' וכלולים בעצמיו' הנפש הנק' יחידה
That there's a kind part of you, and a gevura part - its just you, one simple essence, and just being yourself causes all the other stuff to be revealed, like when you try to be kind, all the details comes out.
The essence of all these things is you - you are kind, wise, etc. A general thing of a human essence, when expressed in one way comes out as wisdom, etc. Really all these sefiros are the "shoes and coats" of the etzem, expressing itself in diffrent ways.
Every person, being human, has these things. They aren't seperate things that come together to make him; even though a computer has computational ability, its not human. Being human is a higher thing which includes automatically all of these details.


Part 8
In general, explaining how lower details are included in a higher essence. First shoes and coats in chesed, then chesed and gevura in etzem. And really you can go higher - theres a lot of diffrent etzem's - there's people, animals, melachim - and all of these have a common essence, which is the G-dly essence.
To continue - we can't say that all of the diffrent heyuli כוחות are seperate things that unite in the yechida
 מאחר שאינן נבדלים מן העצם כלל
you can't have a chessed {person who} doesn't have the rest of the sfiros - they are all part of the human essence, which includes all of them
 כמו מדת חפץ חסד ההיולי הנ"ל שמוטבע בטבעית ועצמיות
Its not a seperate thing, its a part of him{, sunk into him}. Example:water has properties, you can't distinguish diffrent parts for diffrent properties. Unlike the abilities of a car, which could be differentiated - the wheels move, the steering wheel steers, etc. But you can't just take a property of water. Just being water it has all these properties.
Water isn't a perfect analogy; the Mittler Rebbe doesn't bring it. It's just an example to understand his analogy. The nature of people is to have such and such charachter traits and abilites. Being a person means {also} having a thing of being kind - when someone seems to lack kindness, we say that he's a monster, not a person. And when someone seems to lack gevura, we say that he's an angel. Then we see him get angry and "Ah", now we see that he's human.
 הגם שהוא חלק אחד הנמשך מעצם הנפש ממש שלמעל' מהיות חפץ חסד בעצמיות
A person is higher then chessed, not defined by it. And certainly you can't define Hashem as being pure kindness without gevura. To say that is כפירה ממש! It must be that a person has a faculty of chesed, otherwise he's not a person, but chesed doesn't define him. He's himself, not a chessed machine.
 שזהו ענין פרטי ממהות' העצמי' הפשוט' בתכלי'
He's higher than these things, can choose not to reveal himself in a certain way.
 מ"מ
Even though these things are small details.
 א"א לומ' בו שמתאחד במדת נצוח ההיולית הנטוע בעצם הנפש
These would seem to be, relatively speaking, lowly, coarse things. How could they coexist as one simple essence? It would seem reasonoble to say that they are united, like different parts of a car, but not that they're mamesh part of a simple unity, like we brought an example earlier from olive oil.
  מאחר שמיוחדים שניהם בעצמות ואינן נבדלין כלל וכלל מן העצם
Its not a potential for chesed, gevura, put together to make you, just you, and when there's a situation for chessed, that simple being human can express itself in that way. {Even though they're small details - but this is a part of the simple essence.}


Part 9
Now we'll have more analogies - diffrent add what others lack, give clearer picture.
 ע"ד דוגמא כח התנוע' שנכלל ממש בעצם החי קודם שמניעו לגמרי שאינו נבדל מן העצם כלל
living thing, eats, has energy. Until it moves, this strength isn't something seperate. And soul - can move, wether or not it actually does.
 אעפ"י שבגלוי כח התנוע' להניע דבר פרט יתחלק לכמה פרטי אופנים א"א לומר שכל אופני פרטי התנוע' כלולי' ומתאחדי' היו כשהי' כח התנוע' נכלל בעצם החי
To the energy its all the same, and to the soul its all the same. It's only to the body that there's a difference from one movement to the next.
 מאחר שאז לא הי' בסוג וגדר תנוע' כלל לא בכלל ולא בפרט כו'
So even though has all details, obviously its just a simple thing.

Next analogy: the spreading forth of the souls vitality to enliven the body.
 וכן בחי' גילוי התפשטות החיות להחיות כל הגוף בעודנ' כלול לגמרי בעצם רוח החיים
When the soul ability of being concious of the physical world is revealed, when he's walking down the street and he's hearing all sorts of different things, and smelling and seeing, all these perceptions are seen as being different. But before that happens, when someone's by himself in a quiet, dark room, to the soul itself, there's no pluarality of abilities, the sences don't have any existance yet. Their existance is included in a heyuli way within the existance of the souls ability  to percieve. And physically - to the, brain its all the same. The eye sends a signal, the ear - it's all just impulses flying around. They come from different places, and they end up in different places in the brain, but it's not like theirs images and audio jumping around. Like the digital transmission of information: a movie and a song are both built from the same bits and bytes. One's visual, ones audial, but it's really the same thing.
הגם שבגלויו מתחלק לראי' ושמיע' לעין ואוזן וכה"ג שבודאי גם טרם בואו להתגשם בעין ואוזן בפועל הי' כלול בו חיות הראי' הרוחני' לעין בפ"ע וחיות השמיע' באוזן בפ"ע 
Certainly, even before revealed, soul had the ability. Especially considering that it's the soul that sees, not the eye. Sound doesn't really exists; it's just air moving. The soul interpret that, and creates this sensation of hearing sound, . And seeing - it's just electromagnetic waves bumping around, the soul percieves diffrent colors.
All of these different sensations exist within the soul in a heyuli-simplicity. If someone can see, he can see anything. There's no such thing as a person has the ability to see, excluding that chair. Can be color blind, but thats a physical thing, like blind-fold - doesn't remove power to see. And movement - if someone asks you to pass the mashke and you say, "I'm sorry, I can't; I'm plum out of mashke passing movements", that's not going to go over so well. You can't run out of or not have a movement - you have the essence of movement, so you have everything.
מ"מ קודם שבא' עצם הנפש לכלל בחי' התפשטות החיות גם שכלול בה ה"ז כהתכללות כח התנוע' בעצם החי הנ"ל 
it doesn't have the particular movements, also power - in soul one simple thing, no particular powers, only revealed when comes into body.


Part 10
וכל מה שמוכן ועתיד לבוא לידי גלוי בפועל החיות עדיין יתכן היחוד וההתכללות דראי' ושמיע' וכה"ג
When speaking of soul as it is on it's way into come into body, there is an awareness that this simple thing of perception will come into the different sences, and therefor it's apparent that the soul has all of these sences.
 אבל כאשר כלול לגמרי בעצם הנפש והי' כלא יש במציאו' התפשטות חיות כלל וכלל
The soul itself, the etzem - theres no existence of conciousness
 מצד עצם הנפש שלמעל' הרבה מבחי' התפשטות
No hearing or seeing - just the soul.
 רק שכולל בעצמו' ג"כ בחי' ההתפשטות כעצם החי שכולל בעצמו כח התנוע' כנ"ל
In which there isn't an existence of movement. Also within the soul, there's no existence of diffrent sences.
 א"כ איך יתכן בחי' היחוד והתכללו' דפרטי אור וחיות רק מצד שעתיד ומוכן לצאת בהתפשטות חיות בהתחלקות פרטי חיות מזה מוכרח לומר שיש כל פרטים הללו בהתפשטו' הכלולה בעצם לגמרי שאל"כ מאין נמצאו פרטים הללו בגלוי ההתפשטות
Came from there, must be there - but at that point no existence of diffrent things.
 כמו האור וזיו שכלול בעצם השמש שיש בו בהעלם כל פרטי אופני זיו המתפשט וכה"ג
In the body of the sun there isn't any light. It's just stuff. 
Like lightbulb - the fillament has no light. But  its nature is that when you run electricity through it gets hot and gives off light. But even when its giving off light - the wire is not light. Also sun - all the diffrent types of light come from there, but it is not light.
Also essence of soul - comes out into all of these things {of chesed etc}, but within itself they don't exist at all. Forget about the particular forms of their expression- the whole concept of these things doesn't exist yet, its a higher essence. Like sun - its higher then being light, not a big ball of light leaking out slowly {which would לכורה be a כח}.
Analogies in Chasidus exact, chosen because there source is the topic under discussion, so important to stick to them. But once you understand this idea of heyuli, you can see how its seen in many contexts: Talent, e.g. of music. Didn't have the particular songs - if had them, why didn't he write them immidiately? But at the same time, only he could come up with these songs, they come from his style and his talent. 
וד"ל.
You have to know what part of the analogy to discard. Like if someone says "the jet was like an eagle in a sky" - it didn't have feathers. The whole idea of an analogy is that youre saying something that its not. Also here - theres a few main points, the other stuff... Primarily, any limitations are only in the משל.

At the beggining of the chapter, the Mittler Rebbe mentioned three levels before the tzimtzum. Untill now, the focus was on one, yachid. Now, the Mittler Rebbe goes through all three levels.
 ונמצא ג' מדריגות1 זא"ז נמשך מעצמיו' הנפש ממש הנק' בחי' יחידה
 
 Yachid
  הא' י' כחות עצמי' והיוליים כמו חפץ וחסד העצמי והיולי וכה"ג כלולים בה בתכלית כהתכללות כח התנועה בעצם החי
that over there there isn't any movement, but because of what it is movement can come from it
 וכהתכללות התפשטו' החיות בעצם כנ"ל


Part 11
 ולא יתכן בהם לומר לשון התאחדות מדברים נבדלים יחד
not seperate thing, just being human. And also with power of movement, and perception -  they aren't comprised of any details.
 אחר שכלולים לגמרי בעצם והיה כלא היה במציאות כלל וכלל כנ"ל.
Because only the etzem exists, just that included in its existence is that it could make this other stuff.

Echad
 והב' בחי' התפשטות י' כחות שמוכנים לבא בבחי' גלוי כמו חפץ חסד העצמי ההיולי שבא לדבר חסד בדרך פרט
e.g: he wants to get someone a present, or give a pair of shoes to a poor guy
 גם קוד' שנמשך בפו"מ רק כשעתיד ומוכן לצאת לדבר פרט
Opens door, sees poor guys, it looks like he needs a coat - but he doesn't know exactly what size coat the guy needs, what type of coat, where he'll get it; not particular yet. Before, just had this thing in his עצם that he's a nice guy. Now he wants to do something because of this nature.
שם יתכן ענין האחדות מכמה פרטי' שבו
you can say theres a general desire to give a coat, and that desire recognizes all the details that will come out, but for now included in the one general point. They aren't distinct things, but they have some sort of existance.
 כמו שכל ומדות שבחפץ חסד זה
Within this particular echad desire is all the stuff, it just needs to be brought out בפועל. Its all there as a general thing, a recognition that sechel etc. will be required. He sees all those things as they come together. Kindness has a lot of parts, and if one of them missing it's not a chessed. So at that stage there are diffrent things coming together.
 הנמשך מהעלמות ההיולי הכללי כו'. 

Kadmon
והג' כשנמשך ובא לאותו דבר פרט רק שעדיין לא בא מצד העדר ומניעה אבל ההכנה בעצמה כבר בשלימותה ולא חסר רק לבא בהתגלות בפ"מ
knows exactly what he's going to do, just wasn't able to actually do it yet.
 דהיינו שכבר שיער היטב בעצמו בדרך פרט לאותו דבר שבא לפו"מ והיינו שיער בעצמו בכח מה שצריך להביא בפועל

Contrasts echad and kadmon, as they are found in two different analogies
  כמו ע"ד דוגמא הנ"ל בכח התנועה כשעתידה לצאת בגלוי בדבר פרט וכמו התפשטות החיות להחיות לגוף כשמוכן לצא שכלולי' שם ביחוד כללי כל החיות פרטיי'
like wants to move to get something - this is a general preperation that includes the details. Doesn't think about all the particular parts. Or basketball - when practicing, need to think of the details. But when it comes down to it, better just to have in mind the general movement.

And now he gets into kadmon
 ואח"כ הוא מה ששיער והכין כבר בכח התנועה איך להניע דרך פרט
which is why two people can try for a hoop and one will miss and the other get it in. Because one of them, from practice, is better able to measure the movement that is needed.
 וכן מה ששיער התגלות התפשטות רוח החיים והוכן בו מה שעתיד להחיות בפו"מ
when the vitality goes into eye, even before sees, its ready for sight, only.
 וכמ"כ דמיון כח הצומח כשמוכן להצמיח בפו"מ שיש בזה ג"כ ענין ג' מדריגות הללו והכל הוא טרם שבא הדבר עדיין בפו"מ 
1) a spiritual thing, higher than making a particular plant grow
2) as this comes into dirt. Even though it can grow anything, but now this כח is here in a more limited way, and different ground is better for diffrent things
3) as it's able to grow a particular tree - ready, didn't do it yet.
Perhaps - the Mittler Rebbe brings this analogy also because in it is seen the need for צמצום, the neccesety for a seed. Even though can grow anything, and this in particular, without the seed nothing is going to happen.
כמו התנועה קודם שבאה בגש' הנפעל או החיות הרוחני קודם שבא בגשם הגוף ששם משתנה ממהות רוחני' למהות גשם שהוא בחי' תנועה גשמיו' והחיות גשמיו' וכה"ג בגשם הצמיח' כו' שצריך לזה בחי' צמצום וכיווץ בגלוי זה הרוחני בתחלה כדי שיבוא מכלל רוחניות לגשמיות (כמשי"ת באות הי"ב):


{Addendum
This וא"כ has troubled me for a very long time. Perhaps this is a valid explanation.
וא"כ מובן ממילא שבחי' מדת העצמיו' דכח"ב וחג"ת ונהי"ם ההיולים שבעצמיו' הנפש לא יתכן לומר גם לשון זה שמתאחדי' וכלולים בעצמיו' הנפש הנק' יחידה מאחר שאינן נבדלים מן העצם כלל
We feel within ourselves that we are not a composite of assorted intellectual and emotional abilities; rather, "I am I", simple and unified. But how could this be when there comes from us such an infinite variaty of stuff?
Untill now we have explained that despite all the stuff that comes from them, the essential attributes of חסד, גבורה, etc are completely simple. Being that this is the case, we can see how it could be that these simplicities can coexist within the essence without contradicting its simple unity, or like we said earlier "If so that being kind doesn't mean haveing all these details actually there, rather it's just a simple part of identity, of who you are, etc."
There isn't stuff of chesed and gevura - its all just a flavor of me. Which we could not have clearly understood before the demonstaration of the simplicity of the abilities. Before, there is a very marked diffrence between them.
 ... ע"ד דוגמא כח התנוע' שנכלל ממש בעצם החי קודם שמניעו לגמרי שאינו נבדל מן העצם כלל
This is understood from the power of movement, that the power of movement is not seperate from the thing of being alive. Being alive means being able to move (there are exceptions, but אכ"מ). "Dead dogs don't bark." Its not a seperate thing.
 אעפ"י שבגלוי כח התנוע' להניע דבר פרט יתחלק לכמה פרטי אופנים א"א לומר שכל אופני פרטי התנוע' כלולי' ומתאחדי' היו כשהי' כח התנוע' נכלל בעצם החי מאחר שאז לא הי' בסוג וגדר תנוע' כלל לא בכלל ולא בפרט כו'
We have the same problem with the power of movement that we have with the ספירות - there's so many movements that a person can make, how can the power they come from be a simple thing thats included in an automatic way within the essential thing of being alive?
The answer is the same (as the one which enabled the וא"כ): All these different things aren't there at all, וכנ"ל באריכות.
 וכן בחי' גילוי התפשטות החיות להחיות כל הגוף בעודנ' כלול לגמרי בעצם רוח החיים הגם שבגלויו מתחלק לראי' ושמיע' לעין ואוזן וכה"ג שבודאי גם טרם בואו להתגשם בעין ואוזן בפועל הי' כלול בו חיות הראי' הרוחני' לעין בפ"ע וחיות השמיע' באוזן בפ"ע מ"מ קודם שבא' עצם הנפש לכלל בחי' התפשטות החיות גם שכלול בה ה"ז כהתכללות כח התנוע' בעצם החי הנ"ל
The power of movement is just one power. From there the Mittler Rebbe goes to all the physical abilities, that all of them are included within the soul in the same way. Which brings us back to the ספירות, and how they are all included in the עצם.
}
