Chapter 17


Part 1
(יז) והנה מעתה יש להבין בפרטי ענין הקו כמו שהוא בבחי' עגולים כו'. והנה תחלה יש להקדים בבחי' ראשית הקו הזה שבא בבחי' או"פ ואח"כ מתעגל ונמשך בבחי' או"פ וחוזר ומתעגל כו' ומבואר בע"ח שבבחי' ע"ס דעגולים העליון מכולם משובח מכלם והפנימי מכולם גרוע כו' ובבחי' ע"ס דיושר להיפך1 העליון גרוע והפנימי משובח כו'. וביאור הדברים הנה ידוע שבחי' רצון קדום זה הגם שלגבי בחי' רצון הפשוט המוחלט בעצמות נק' התפשטות רצון
Before you didn't want anything, just the ratzon hamuchlet, a giluy of etzem, and now you have a desire.
 אבל עדיין הוא בהעלם ולא בגלוי כלל כי אינו רק השפעת והמשכת רצון הפשוט של חפץ חסד שהוחלט בעצמות מכבר כך יהי' בפו"מ
For example, someone who wants to build a home: at this point its not even a desire for a house, thats a briya/asiya thing, or even a home, no idea of what kind of job etc he would like, its just a thing that you have a certain feeling that you want to be a certain way and somethings holding you back. Like a feeling of restriction living at parents home. This is a desire to "be yourself", meaning that his self should not just be, but be expressed.
Or someone learning an instrument. He always had a ratzon hamuchlet, that certain things sounded good to him, now he wants this self to be expressed - but at this point its just an ephemeral feeling, he doesn't know how to put that into an instrument.
 ומיד שעול' במח' זאת שיהי' הכל
That was in the ratzon hamuchlet
 הוא הנק' מח' ורצון קדום
Father vs firstborn. Father is kadum, origin, firstborn happens to be first.
 שכולל כל מה שבתוכו רצונות פרטים כנ"ל במשל הבנין
The desire for a house doesn't just happen to be first - the other desires' whole existance is from that.
 א"כ עדיין רצון קדום זה הכל בעצמו
There's no thought of anything outside of himself.
 בלתי התגלות לחוץ אבל ממנו נעשה הכל אח"כ
{He's still in a state of kadum, origin to all the desires which follow.}
 וזהו כי הוא אמר במח' הקדומה ויהי2 כו'
Amar really means thought, when its used to mean speech it refers to when says what he's thinking.
A casual conversation with freinds, where the main thing is what your thinking, sharing thoughts. You might just say a few words, and then say "you know what I mean." The words are secondary.
vs an official proclomation - whats important are whats said, how its said etc.

"Ki hu amar" - this is a giluy of thought, in particular the first thought, which is to himself. "Vayehi", all come to be from this speech.


Part 2
 ונק' חיי כל העולמים
This is the motovation for everything
 מראש דא"ק עד עקב א"ק בסוף עשי' והיינו כל היצור לא נכחד כו' שאין פרט היותר אחרון שלא קדם להיות ברצון ובמח' זו 
Even to how many hairs will be on your head, how many times a particular leaf will wave back and forth - its all there, and not only that, its noge'a to tachlis hacavanah.
Why? Thats such a small and unimportant thing!
L'moshul making your dream house, money is not an object, you want it to be perfect exactly as you want it. This applies even to the tiniest details - If you wanted the lock on the windows to work one way, and they work another way - its not "it", something is missing. You could live there, and you'll be comfortable - but its not the perfect dream house. Every detail is important.
The inability to effect, even the smallest change, shows a lack in the ownership and selfexpression of the entire house, even the biggest most important parts.
Everything is in that first ratzon. "I want to buy pizza tonight." What about opening the door to the store? "Don't worry, that first desire covers all that stuff."
ואדרבה סוף מעשה כמו בסוף אלף הז'
Or l'havdil eating the pizza
 עלה במח' קדומה זו תחלה4
The earlier people, Adam and Avrahom etc, were big, general people, way up on the Hishtalshelus. Which is why their stories our relevant to everyone. We are these little particular people, with small partiuclar purposies. Which is also a ma'aluh, becuase davka in the tiny details is the ratzon ha'kudom expressed, the end, eating the pizza.
In a house - the biggest giluy of the ratzon ha'muchlat is davka in the little things. The big things, the support beams, etc, don't really express you, they're just functional. Like we see how people buy prefab houses, and then decorate it exactly as they like it. Specifically over there, in those little decorations, the "personal touch", the person's taste is most expressed, becuase its whole existance is only because of it.
 כמ"ש במ"א באריכות3 
(Now the Mittler rebbe will put everything into its Zoharic context)
(ובל' הזהר נק' עתיקא דעתיקין5
The hiddent pleasure behind all pleasures.
 או עתיקא סתימאה6
(There is a diffrence between the two, which he'll get to at the end of the parenthesis.)
 והוא בחי' רעוא דכ"ר עילאין
Aside for being the hidden pleasure, its also the hidden desire
 דאתגליין במצחא דע"ק7 כו'
The revealed ta'anug in a particular thing
 כי ברצון מלובש התענוג
Therfore one thing can be both. Like we just said that the ratzon ha'kadum is called both.
 והיו לאחדים ממש וברצון הפשוט ההיולי שבחפץ חסד ההיולי (הנ"ל באות יוד ואות יא) היה כלול בו התענוג הפשוט שבעצמו' שנק' שעשועי המלך בעצמותו8 כו' וגם בג' מדריגות עד שבא בדבר פרט אנא אמלוך שזהו בחי' מל' דא"ס שלפני הצמצום כמ"ש שם הכל בחי' שעשועי המלך בעצמו בטה"ע
In chapters 10 and 11, we spoke more from the ratzon perspective. But theirs also the taanug, the joy Hashem takes from himself.
 אך עתיקא דעתיקין מקור כל התענוגי'
Meaning source of all pleasure that comes from things seperate from yourself
 או רעוא דכ"ר כו' היינו בבחי' הקו שאחר הצמצום שכולל כמה רצונות ותענוגים שעתידים לבוא בגלוי
Through its being a general desire to express yourself in what is outside {that you should[/could?] obtain a particular taanug from something outside of yourself[?]}, its an intermediary between pleasure in yourself and outside of yourself.
 ועתיקא סתימא' הוא בבחי' כתר דא"ק
Stima'a/Hidden: thought. Atika Stima'a/Hidden pleasure: A keser, the same Atika D'atikin that we just mentioned, but enclothed in thought, the thought of A"K. 
{We will explain in the next chapter that A"K begins the process of connecting this undefined (see above) desire with a particular desire. So Atika D'atikin/Ratzon Hakudom/The original desire as it exists as the motivation behind that created desire is reffered to as Atika Stima'a. Take another look at this after you learn chapter 18.}


Part 3
 שהוא בהעלם הרצון והתענוג לעצמו עדיין רק שחושב להיות הדבר כך בפועל הגילוי
Even with Keser of A"K, its still only a thought about yourself, feeling a certain way, the diffrence between this and the ratzon hamuchlat {and the ratzon hakadum} is that now he wants it to actually happen.
Before, its more like "Yeah, I sure would like to create a world {or in this case, have the pleasure that a world would give me} , and I guess I know how I would do it...". {And it stops there. There's no actuall drive to make the desire fit into the world and to make it happen.}
At A"K, there's already an idea of, "I sure would like... and therefor". There's an understood interest in action, in actually doing it.
 כמו להיות גילוי הרצון והתענוג להאציל ע"ס כו'9 (ולכך נק' עתיקא סתימא' בחי' העלם לגלוי עכ"פ
Its hidden, {there's no actual desire to do a particular thing yet}, but its a concealment which is waiting to be revealed. There is already an idea of how the feeling of the ratzon ha'kadum can { /a willingness to make it} fit into the world, as will be explained in the next chapter, and more importantly there is an awareness that this fit into the world still expresses the self.
 משא"כ ראשית הקו
{It seems from what Rabbi Walters says later that he holds that this is a refrence to the ratzon hakudom, even though normally it refers to the kav hamida. VTZ"I,  but l'chora KTZ"L}
 נק' סדכ"ס
At that state, there is no connection or interest to giluy.
 דגם מחשבה דא"ק לא תפיס בי' כו')
Whereas Atika Stiama'a is already enclothed in thought of A"K. Stima'a is thought of desire, which is an idea of asociations, like when you know a language, even when your not speaking or listening, you know that certain sounds are connected, or asociated, with certain ideas. {?} 
{maybe - also in iggulim there is a concept of physical expression, but its practically worthless compared to the ratzon hakadum. But, despite the lack of interest at this point in that level, at least it's there, and therefore it can be in A"K, to the point of becoming primary.
Kind of like if you have this deep idea and you know that words couldn't fully capture it [like the inyan of a beis din not being able to sleep untill morning before they pasken etc], you don't talk. You remain within your self. But you do have words, and these words can express it to a certain extent - which leaves room for later on actually talking.
Perhaps this is what he meant, "when you know a language, even when your not speaking".}
{I can't belive I just wrote a perush on a shiur.}
 ולהיות הרצון והתענוג לברוא כו'10 וע"ק הוא התענוג שבחכמה
A pleasure that has a particular form, unlike before when its much more general. Atika d'atikin - desire for your self, then A"K gives this desire a general form, untill now, at Atika Kadisha, a particular form. Which is the idea of Kadisha, kadosh, sepreate, but has a relationship {whereas before its not even called seperate, no connection.}{The next chapter discusses A"K at greater length, and later gets more into keser of atzilus, which he refers to here as the ta'anug which is in chochma. Don't let this parenthesis scare you.}
 והוא בחי' ע"י וא"א דאצי' שהרצון והתענוג בא בגלוי כמשי"ת הכל דרך פרט)
Till now: In iggulim, only thinking about self, that you would really like it to actually have a certain taanug. So there is some sort of a connection to giluy {that you would like to have a taanug from outside of yourself}, which is a very important part of the whole proccess. No one can force you out into the world, you have to decide. But at this point, although there is a feeling, an aspect of yourself which you want to reveal - you don't exactly know how, and the primary thrust is your feeling towards it and pleasure from it, not it.
Like the desire for a home, before the desire for a house, to have a place where you can be yourself, etc.
Or someone has a feeling of emptiness, they want meaning, but don't know how to get that feeling, so... things get interesting. Mid life crisis, buying hotrods, hiking through india [6:44]. If their lucky they find Rabbi Markel's website, and everything's good. Because really everyone has this thing that they want truth in general and G-d in particular. Whats uniqe about a Jew is that not only does he want to know Hashem, he wants a connection which is higher than intellect, mesirus nefesh. But chasidus - everyone wants to know chasidus.
 והנה בחי' ע"ס דעגולים זת"ז11 הוא כידוע שכל עילה מקפת לעלול ועלול לא ישיג לעילה שלו כ"א בריחוק מקום ממנו כאשר יהי' האופן בתוך כו'
A wheel inside of a wheel. Circles inside of circles, a bunch one inside the other, like the circles which are formed when a rock is dropped in a pond. 
 ויובן זה מהרצון הבא בגלוי גמור
He's going to explain this based on explaining how it is in the desires of Atzilus, and from how it is in this revealed desire we'll understand how it is in the concealed desire.


Part 4
 שגם שכלול הרצון הזה מי'12 חכמה ומדות
Chochma is {the image of} what you actually want, middos are what it takes to get there. Based on want you want, certain things are good, certain are bad.
 אבל תחלתו בא רק בהסכם א' בלי התחלקות ניכר בו והוא הנק' עיגול רצון כללי מקיף לכל מה שבא בתוכו מכחו דוקא אך בריחוק מקום כמו הטעם ושכל לרצון זה שנק' עלול שלו א"א שיהי' קרוב בערך אל עילתו שהוא הרצון כי הרי אין טעם לרצון כלל13 כידוע ולעולם לא ישיגנו
For example, a kid decides he wants a book, no reason. After, he comes up with reasons: healthy, get to school faster, etc. But - these reasons don't create his desire, rather the opposite, and they don't capture it. 
So if you tell him "for exercise you can walk to school" "but need to get there on time" "so run" - he's not going to say, "hey, thats a good point" - he still wants the bike!
This is something very commen, that a person doesn't want to say his desire so he hides it behind contrived reasons. For example, "Can you help me move my stuff?" "I'd love to, but-" and he gives a whole bunch of reasons. But really he's just not intrested. A benefit of this is that you take the pressure off of yourself, that it isn't a desicion that I'm making, rather its circumstance. But there's a problem - if the person takes away all the reasons that you have not to help him...your stuck.[4:27].
Because the reason doesn't fully express the desire. Or in a debate, if you disprove their arguments, they'll rarely change their mind, because the reason isn't why. 
 אבל מ"מ מכח הרצון נעשה עיגול החכמה ג"כ בלי התחלקות ניכר לי' כו' כמו משל השוחד שימצא טעם לרצון וגם שבטעם זה כלול ג"כ מיו"ד רצון ושכל ומדות אבל נעשה בבחי' כללי כו' 
Its not a recognizable, set chochma. Its more of a bias. The chochma created by the desire is the essence of chochma, that it will create reasons in the direction of the desire from whatever information it is able get.
So if someone has a ratzon towards chesed, his intellect will be towards chesed, for example towards your son, justifying etc.
No details of the chochma are developed yet. {The sefiros of chochma are discussed later, and in chapters 1 and 2.}
 ועד"ז לא ישיגנו העיגול דבינה שנעש' מכחו
The reasons (bina) don't fullly express the opinion (chochma), and therefore can't influence it, and not neccisarily is it even a good proof - its just the best you got, and the chochma twists it to conform to the desire. {L'chora, over here also its not in a way of an actual bina, rather a bias for bina, that bina will be going in a particular direction.}
 ועד"ז המדות זת"ז עד סוף מעשה שהוא עיגול האחרון
By the time you get to action - nothing is good enough, no action can capture the grandure and meaning that is layered in the desire. It is the least important, the smallest and most limited expression. LIke a kid goes into the bakery and can't decide what he wants. Because he has this desire for something great, and all the things only contain one tiny amount of one aspect of the greatness that a pastry can posess.
 והכל ברצונו לעצמו כלול הכל עד סוף מעשה שהוא הפנימי מכולם כו'
Its all in the desire, in a way of bias, not an actual plan for action, but a bias to search for actions and lifestyle choices that express the desire.
Its the inner, because it exists only in the context of all the others, which are described as surrounding it, that it is located inside them. The reason this action has any existance at all is because it comes after everything else, that it is seen to capture a certain emotion that is according to a certain detailed understanding of the desire.
Or the action of even building a house - the action comes according to the understand in bina of the picture in chochma of what you want in keser.
Dressing in style. They buy something because it has certain charachteristics, midos, and they care about these things because bina connects these things to the image of chochma of what style means, which is important because of his inner desire to express himself, be in style, whatever.


Part 5
 וכך הוא רצון הקדום הנ"ל מקור כל הרצונות כלול מי"ס עד"ז עיגול בתוך עיגול עד עיגול דסוף מעשה שהוא הרצון לסוף מעשה להיות כל אשר חפץ עושה בפו"מ כו' והעיגול העליון הכולל הכל הוא רצון הקדום הנ"ל
The desire for a dira batachtonim is the reason for everything else, and nothing fully captures/expresses that.
Like giving flowers - that doesn't innately express anything, its chosen/made to be a hint.
Tzitzis vs the talis that they're hanging from - the talis is this big makif, and for it to be revealed comes out in a small, token representation, which is the idea of the tzitzis.
 
Home: starts as a dream, if he could have his dream house what would it be like, and he's even looking at particular houses - but its still not an actual plan to do.
But when he decides to actually do it, theres a big shift. Untill now, the main thing was his desire, which he could make as big and fantastic as he wants because within himself there are no limitations from reality. But when he actually wants to do it - now it has to fit into reality, the desire changes based on that.
Rebbe Rayat"z - on the boat, dictated to his seceratary his plans for America: Merkos, Kehos, Machene Yisroel, etc. And he said, "Why am I doing this planning here? Get to America, see whats going on, and plan based on that? Because I don't want to get there and be influenced by what I see and build an American Yidishkeit, I want an uncompromising European Yidishkeit."
So - it has to start out as a dream, you have to know what is it that you really want, and everything else, the intellect {or the "intellect", as discussed earlier} the emotions, your "plan" for what you want to happen, exists soley to express that dream in the most perfect manner, no holds barred.
But when you decide you actually want to do it, you choose a particular thing you want to do, and then making that a reality becomes the primary, and everything else bends to make it work. Even the essential desire, your dream, is secondary to your desire to actually do something, and bends if needed. [8:30]
Example: Someone wants to do something, he doesn't know what. So he thinks about what he wants, meaning what pleasure/feeling he wants to get. Maybe he's in a quiet, thoughtful mood, maybe he wants to cheer up a bit, etc.
Then he decides that what he wants right now, that will quiet the stirrings of his restless soul, is a few slices of pizza. With onions and fetta cheese.
That feeling that he decided that he wants would be his ratzon hakadum, and the pizza (with onions and fetta cheese) would be malchus of iggulim.
Now he has to figure out how to go about that. He has to find his shoes, his car keys, etc. These desires are desires of yosher. {More particularly, l'chora also in iggulim these inyanim have an existance, but specifically in yosher does this stuff have any sort of importance to him.}
Similiarly, {L'havdil. U'lair that the gashmiyus of a Yid is ruchniyos v'chu', VK"M} Hashem decided that he wanted a dira b'tachtonim. 
In iggulim a desire is tracked down that expresses what he wants.
In A"K, after a particular form is decided on, it is chosen to actually happen. That form gains importance and becomes the dominant force in everything that happens from that point on in creation. { Something about the feet of A"K extending all the way down to the physical world?} Like if a king says "move the mountain", you have to figure out a way to do it. This desire is king, and everything is according to it.
In the moshul of a persons malchus of iggulim, the desire for a physical house, there isn't any inyan of how to actually get it. {l'hair that its there b'yidias atzmo kana"l}{there l'chora, just not important. see earlier note.} The whole desire is just for the house, and in particular for the pleasure that the house will give you. This is the real desire, a greater giluy of you.
In A"K, the desire and pleasure for all the practical parts of getting a house are created to enable the actuall dwelling in the house.
For example, an interest in house shopping is created. Really, it's not the funnest thing in the world, so why are you interested in doing it? Because you want the house, so a minimal amount of desire and pleasure needed to get you to do what needs to be done to actually get it is created.
The ratzon/taanug in the sechel of what are the qualites of the house you're looking for is seen in A"K as being something {distant and theoretical?} created in order to obtain the real goal, the pleasure of a home. {whereas in Iggulim - you could spend all day thinking of what would be the best thing that would realize this desire that you have. Intellect is less limited than middos [which are according to the intellect], and it can contain the bli gvul of your desire better}
The middos, your feelings towards it, are even more important to you. {L'chora, intellect has an idea of what you want in a house, than when you actually see the house you have a feeling towards it according to what was set up in intellect. In yosher, this feeling towards a particular house is more important to you than the intellect which creates it, because its more real, ie closer to action.}
Lastly, the most important thing in A"K is to actually get the house. {Or more particular, to get the satisfaction that you hope the house will provide.} {Nautz tchilusun b'sofon etc, kul hamayluh mayluh b'yoser etc}


Part 6
Iggulim: The main thing is the desire, the least important is the action, because the whole inyan is you, what you want, how you feel. The actual thing done to get that feeling is seen as being contrived. Like in a language: The main thing is the idea, the words chosen to represent that are external and insignificant compared to the actual thing. {Do you want gold, or [the word] g-o-l-d?}
Rosh Hashono/Yom Kippur: connect to this level, to realize that all this torah and mitzvos stuff, dira b'tachtonim, don't have any intrinsic value, they're invented, what we care about is Hashem. This is teshuva, to reconnect to the original source, in this case the first iggul.
After, comes the transition to yosher. In iggulim, we say that Hashem is important. In yosher this becomes the commitment to do all those things which he asociates his ratzon with, to the point of mesirus nefesh. Hashem wants me to put teffilin on every day? To mesiros nefesh, and communist Russia can't stop me.
The intellect of the mitzva, the kavanah, the emotions- all those are secondary, the main thing is to actually do it.
Choosing a house: at that point you can say "maybe this one, maybe that one..." but at a certain point, you have to decide on one, and stick to it{, and now that one becomes your whole desire}.
Sukkos: go into a temporary dwelling, that all of this mitzva stuff isn't something of inherent {and ergo permanant, represented by a a permant house} worth. The idea is don't be frum. Some people have this thing of being frum, and they forget that really the main thing is not just to do, but to do what Hashem wants, becuase he wants it.
With sukkos, Hashem wants you to realize that even though this frum business becomes a set thing, that most of the year we live in houses, but the start has to be "I want Hashem", not "I want to be frum". {Like the joke of the kolell guy who had a nightmare, v'dal}. {Its important to have this at the beggining, as} We see in halacha that the main part of l'shmo {in this case the main part of the awareness that Hashem is ikkur, and mitzvos are created} is at the beggining of the action, then you have to put that on the side and actually do it. [9:12] 
[10:30]
 וכשבא הרצון לעצמו הזה להיות בפו"מ הרי הוא להיפוך שהרצון מתעלם ומתלבש בשכל
Now that you actually want to do something, the sechel becomes more important than the ratzon, the desire has to be something that is do-able {/sensible}.


Part 7
 והשכל מקיפו
The intellect is the main thing, it changes the ratzon to fit it, the ratzon can't influence it.
 והשכל מתעלם ומתלבש במדות זת"ז
Something might me logically sound, but in yosher the intellect has to fit into the middos. For example, if the intellect says, "I need a certain amount of money, so I could become a garbage man", the middos might say, "thats great, but I don't want to do that." {Or according to the intellect, the most reasonable way to get a house might be to find a cardboard box in a dumpster outside of Walmart. No mortgage, no maintaince - its a good idea. But the middos will say no. }
Middos vs ratzon: ratzon is the essential thing, middos are a reaction to something outside. For example, a persons ratzon wants candy. Their intellect tells them what will get them and prevent them from getting candy. If you combine the two in a particular situation, you get a mida. For example, he knows that if he listens to his parents, they'll give him candy. So when it happens that he's actually told to do something, he'll see doing what his parent's want with a benevolent eye, and he'll have a fear of going against them.
{So how can the emotions go against the intellect? In this case, it would seem that in terms of the house, the middos towards a cardboard house would in fact be positive. And in iggulim that would be enough because in iggulim the upper overpowers/controls the lower. [this is a bit of a stretch, because that would be a bit more fantastic kana"l, but if you would apply the iggulim relationship in this context this makes sence I hope.] But in yosher the upper has to fit into the lower, the lower sefira is real and unbiased, and it exists beyond the context of this house thing, it takes into account other considerations and other intellects. So - even though the intellect of house-getting is telling him "This is a great idea", the middos can say "no, this doesn't fit."
Perhaps we could bring an example from scamming. A person wants money, and the intellect says "hey, why not try this?" And its a good idea, getting only a little bit of money from a lot of people, no one gets hurt. A person operating in a way of iggulim, passion, etc would go for this immidiately. But a man of yosher [and specifacly yosher is called a person] would have other considerations and values to deal with besides the immidiate desire that he's dealing with now, and [hopefully] will decide to not become a world-class scammer. [I think this makes sence, it would be kewl if it was true also.] }
 עד סוף מעשה הוא העליון מהכל דהיינו כח המעשה בפו"מ הרי בו מלובש המח' ובמח' מלובש המדות וחיצון שבכולם הוא המעשה גרוע כו'
[3:51] Really, iggulim and yosher go together, they both go all the way down to action. The diffrence is that iggulim gets has less and less interest the farther you go from the original ratzon, becomes nothing can really capture and express the awesomness of your desire. But in yosher you want it to happen, so the closer to reality you get the more important it becomes.
For example, if someone likes swimming. Then he decides that he will obtain this desire through a swimming pool, not a lake etc. Now the deeper desires are hidden, and only this external thing is visible. The kernel of truth, what you really want, is now concealed in the sechel, that you'll get this with a pool. Then, looking through a catalogue, you see a particular one you like, which has particular charachteristics, measurements, and you want it. {The application of the intellect to a particular thing is an inyan of middos.} Now, the sechel becomes concealed in that mida, that you want that pool.
This is a commen thing. Someone's hungry, and he wants any sort of food. Then for whatever reason he decides on a particular food, maybe becuase he sees it, and now he wants that one, and if suddenly he can't get it he'll find a way to get it.
Back to the pool - he needs money, so he gets to work. Also over here, the work becomes the main thing, people can get caught up in their work and forget what its all about. Going down it continues like this, that when a higher level becomes connected to a lower level, the lower takes over, and the higher keeps behind the scenes. [10:30]
{This is because, kana"l, that the closer to the bringing the desire to reality the better, and making money is closer to getting it than looking through a magazine.}
Yosher called a person, because people have to act in this sort of a reasonable manner, with the desire being subservient to the intellect etc.
Igulim is like the soul as it is beyond the body, yosher as it goes in. {Thats why its called a person, because in order to go in, it has to obtain that form.
Igulim - ratzon bribes/forces sechel, which in turn bribes middos, untill action, that you'll do crazy things for your desire, and justify it according to sechel.
Yosher - the focus is on doing it in the best way. So the intellect has a real say.


Part 8
Is the main thing thought or action?
Iggulim says thought, "its the thought that counts"
yosher says action, "the road to gehinnom is paved with good intentions"
"Hanistaros etc." The hidden, iggulim, reasons spiritual levels etc, is to Hashem, thats not what we have to worry about. Our business is action, "Haniglot etc." "Ki koruv...la'asoso" - Hashem wants us to do it.
Written torah all about the bottom line, Oral tells how how to get yourself to do it {maybe reffering to says stuff to awaken ahava and yira, tells the principles behind and the spirtitual levels involved, all of which make it more interesting/easier to do}.
For example: torah tells us diffrent forbidden relationships. Our sages teach that in order to keep to these laws {the deeper thing behind these issurim{?}} we need modesty, yichud, tznius, etc.
Torah - this is what you have to do, yosher, action is primary, Oral - here's some stuff behind it, or/and that enable it.
{V'tzurich iyun ktzas, v'yesh l'ayen b'makur, because it seems close to saying, "Written says get this, Oral says how", which makes it sound like Written is an inyan of iggulim and Oral is an inyan of yosher. Thats incorrect, so I tried to lean the last few sentances in the proper direction.}
"Elokim bara es ha'adam yosher", Hashem told us what he wants, "v'hayme beekshu tachbulos", people come around and say "I know that he said he wants 'a', but I know from iggulim that the real goal is 'b', and that goal doesn't have to be reached with these means. Based on this that I'll do something diffrent than what he said and he'll like it more."
 והוא בבחי' היושר כשבא בבחי' התלבשות העליון בתחתון כו' אבל בבחי' רצון הקדום הנ"ל שעדיין הוא בעצמו ע"כ נמשך בבחי' עגולים שהעליון מהכל הוא העלם הרצון הכולל הזה ועיגול הראשון שבו הוא הרצון ותענוג לכללות כל השתלשלות שבתוכו ועיגול זה מקיף כללי לאבי"ע כנ"ל 
{And now to the kav.}
וראשית הקו הוא בחי' המשכה היולית כמו קו קצר המתצמצם מעילה לעלול
We said that in iggulim the lower thing doesn't capture, certainly can't over-power, the upper circle, it just represents the upper. This thing of representation is a tzimtzum of a line, that everything is there, but in only in a way of asociation. {Meaning the etzem is concealed, and this thing is a hint, it represents, the etzem. Eg the desire reveals itself as a [possibly contrived] intellect}.{This over-powering is in iggulim specifically, not yosher, and Tz"I how/if this fits over there. B'pashtus, even in yosher there in truth is a big seperation from eg mochin to middos, but the michon is m'vatel itself to the middos. vdu"k}
The ratzon could come out in any way, and in chochma you just take one picture of what you want. The connection between anything and something is a line.
Nimshal: the whole creation, from the ratzon ha'kadum, is just one small way that the ratzon hamuchlet could come out.
 כמו מן הרצון לחכמה וכה"ג כך מבחי' הרשימו הנ"ל נמשך קו בצמצום גדול מאד דהגם שהרשימו הוא בא בהגבלה כנ"ל אבל הוא מבחי' עולם הא"ס עכ"פ
[Part 9] its every possible gvul. [/]
 רק שהוא בחי' האחרונה שנעשה בקיצור כו'
Moshul: a person has a taste/style, a way he likes to do things, And even when he brings this down to the reshimu, when all that is visible is the external definition of his style, what choices he would make in a given situation, and the fact that this is connected to his etzem is concealed, it's still infinite. {One way that this infinite-ness is expressed is that } there is no up and down {(which we said earlier that priorities are a function of the kav)}, no priorites, the coat rack is equally important to a garage as ausentatios as the Taj Mahal {because to the inifinite all particular things are the same, the coat rack and the taj mahal are equally just pratim of his essential taste.}
Everything is in the reshimu, but to cause one particular thing, has to come into a kav, one particular giluy, with a seder, higher and lower, etc.
Kav takes from the reshimu, and makes the first circle, that the most important thing is that I'm looking for a home {diffrent than a house, kana"l}, this includes the sub things {Kana"l}, untill yosher - all through this kav taking from one level to the next.


Part 9
Their is a real giluy of the etzem in the kav, because it's measured, and the one measuring is you.
Teacher: Has all his knowlage even when he's not thinking about it. Inyan of reshimu.
Kav: Based on who he's talking to, reveals from what he knows. Now a giluy, this idea was his before the tzimtzum { connected to choice?}
Before tzimtzum: Desire to be. Desire to be someone who does - malchus/sof maaseh of Ein Sof. Idea of reshimu - that something {which apears} seperate could be a giluy of you.
Also with teacher: the ideas aren't really seperate, he makes it seem like that in order to influence outside of himself.
 משא"כ להיות רצון קדום שהוא בא לכלל השפעה חוץ מעולם הא"ס רק שהוא היולי כולל הכל כו' ע"כ נמשך דרך קו קצר כו' וד"ל
Before, it was every gvul, now you're choosing one. {L'chora this is a jump from cause to effect, Kan"l b'fnim} 
 (והוא מ"ש בע"ח דכל עיקר הארת הקו אינו רק להיות בחי' מעלה ומטה כמו ביו"ד עגולים עד סוף מעשה כו'
That first keser, than chochma, etc, that chochma is just representing one small perspective {?} of keser.
 משא"כ בעולם הא"ס אין שם אפי' בחי' מעלה ומטה רק אח"פ בתכלית כנ"ל
Your taste is you, its not a seperate thing.
 וגם ששיער בעצמו מה שעתיד כו'
In a way of a taste etc.
 הכל הוא בעצמותו ממש
Its not a decision of particular stuff, a favorite color - its a more general thing.
 שהוא בבחי' א"ס ממש ולזה א' בע"ח דגם בבחי' מל' דא"ס אין רשאי' לדבר14 כו'
Because really its not something we can have any understanding of, it's not a thought of a particular thing, its infinite and simple {no parts or divisions} etzem.
With people we have the same problem - you can't really pin down your style, all you can do is focus on the action, and the style will be expressed automatically.
 רק בבחי' הקו ובחי' א"ק כו' שהוא בחי' מקור הראשון לכל ההשתלשלות יוכל לבא בהשגה בריבוי ההשתלשלות עד ע"ס שבאצי' בבי"ע כו' מאחר שנק' בשם עילות כל העילות15 כו'
So its somewhat represented in what comes after.
 או קדמון כו'16 אבל בעצמות אא"ס לית מח' ת"ב17 אפי' מח' הקדומה הנ"ל להיות כי העולם הא"ס נבדל בערך ונק' קדוש לגמרי מצד הצמצום הנ"ל
There's no kav connecting before and after the tzimtzum - its a jump, the tzimtzum seperates {as if}. {U'lhair that the light after is the same light as was before kana"l. But it seems seperated because of the tzimtzum.}
Later, there's a small prat being revealed. The whole thing of tzimtzum is that now there is a complete concealment - before it was just you, and now there's outside.
 ובחי' רצון קדום הנ"ל נק' שמו הגדול שמו גי' רצון18 והוא ענין יהא שמיה רבא מברך19 כו'
We say that kavana in this tears 70 years of heavenly decrees against a person.
"The big name should be revealed" - the first desire, moshiach etc, when revealed - no decrees etc, because all of the small mistakes we do aren't important next to the main goal.
 (וכידוע דבחי' א"ק נק' אדם דבריאה20 כו' וכמשי"ת משא"כ בעצמות אא"ס נאמר כי לא אדם הוא21 כו' וכידוע בכונות דנשמת כל חי22 שהוא בחי' א"ק כו' וד"ל):


PS
A lot of things in this chapter were written as if diffrent sefiros and madragos have there own choices, and are independent from Hashem. Please don't be a yukkel and actually think that. Even in the moshel from a person, all these things are very obviously the person himself, the etzem of the person, revealing/expressing itself in diffrent ways. V'ayn l'haarich b'dvorim pshutim umuvonim lakol.
