Chapter 25
{I'm very proud of my novlos biur in part 2. Maybe it's even true.}
{There's an important note in the beggining of part 6, "L'hair, that". It's part of my ongoing struggle to make things more general. In keser this is based on what I saw pointed out in siddur im dach, baruch she'amar that even maskil is helem that it's metzius is known. So k'muvan higher than chochma is b'helem. The question is if the middos of arich are also b'helem. L'chora hayah N"L she'kein. V'Adayun Tz"I.}


Part 1
(כה) והנה מעתה יש להבין בפרטי ענין ע"ס דאצי' 
Which happens in three ways.
דהיינו בירידת האור מחיצוניות נה"י דא"א באו"א
First way
 ולפעמים א' דאו"א מלבישי' לזרועות דא"א12
Second
"Right arm", chesed of Arich, goes into chochma, and the "left arm", gvura goes into bina. Like puppets.
 (ומ"ש רישא דמלכא בחו"ג אתתקן13
The head of the king is fixed in {its source} chesed and gvura.
 היינו בחי' רישא דא"א דאתתקן בחו"ג דע"י
{The head of Arich is set in (it's source) chesed and gvura of Atik, kana"l.}
 חסד דע"י בגולגלת' כו'
...and gvura is m'luvash in mocha stima'a.
 כנ"ל) ולפעמים א' דאבא יונק ממזל הח' ונוצר ואימא ממזל הי"ג ונקה14 כו':
Third
That Av"A recieve from the mazalos, י"ג middos ha'rachamim, to be discussed.


אך הנה ידוע בענין כח מה דהחכמה15 מאין תמצא16 בבחי' אין
Chochma has bitul, can relate to a sechel even when it can't reach it, when it's on the level of what, as in, "What was that?"
 והבינה נק' יש17
Tangible, explainable
 והאור ושפע דאין דחכ' מאיר ונמשך בבחי' השגה דבינה
The connection to the intangible, unexplainable essence of the idea shines into bina. The understanding of  bina hints to the sechel as it is in chochma. We see this very clearly if someone tries to explain something, and no one understands, except for one guy who already "has" the idea, who says, "Yeah, I know what you're trying to say." Technically, the explanation is bina, details etc, but in this case it's very clear that it's hinting to something deeper, such that only someone who already has that deeper thing will be able to understand what he's saying. {MaShEi"K a good explanation which k'muvan everyone would understand. But this example distills the chochma aspect of the bina (b'chlollil).}
Basicaly, the abstract chochma shines into the concrete bina.
 שזהו מאין ליש ונק' תרין רעין דלא מתפרשין18 כו' כחדא שריין19 כו'
Can't have one without the other.
 והוא בחי' נקודה דחכמה שמבריק כברק מלמעלה מן השכל 
You get an idea - the nekuda of chochma, than you begin developing the idea in bina.
(בל' העולם הבנה כו')
Even though they can't neccesarily explain it. Like if they hear an explanation, and they get it - they don't have all the details straight, and they can't explain it, but they have it in a way of chochma, "I understand." In this sefer, understanding means having all the details, bina, but b'loshun ha'olem, "I understand" means "I got the point."
 והיינו מכח המשכיל 
The ability to create sechel.
שנק' ח"ס דא"א ונק' חכמה נעלמה שהוא מקור מוצא כל שכל מאין כו' ונק' משכיל
The one who makes intellect, the intellectual.
 כידוע והיינו שאמר דאור אבא יונק ממזל הח' ונוצר אותיות צינור20 כצינור דק 
There's the brain, the skull, and between the two is the kruma d'avirah, the membrane of air. The membrane is full of liquid, which drips through "hairs", thin tubes in the membrane, to the brain. That liquid can be pleasure or intellect, depending on where in the brain it bumps into. {V'nirah that the liquid in the kruma d'avirah is what is called maskil.}
The 13 midos harachamim, mazelos of arich, are 13 ways that the liquid hits the brain.
The first 6 are in a way of chesed and cause pleasure, because there's a lot of it {hence it's called the first six}.
The last 6 cause sechel, because there's less of this liquid.
The first mazel is the least limited, through the 6 of pleasure becomes more and more specific, untill eg taanug murkav, taanug from a very specific thing.
The last 6: Intellect. Number 8 is source of chochma, called "cold and wet", more liquid, so a more holistic understanding. Bina is called "Hot and dry", very little liquid, thin hairs, so it's very specific.
The middle, 7, "V'emes", is a m'mutza between these two, the decision between the first and last 6, between chesed and gvura. To have a choice, not just an intellectual understanding of both sides of the inyan.

Mazel: nozel, to drip. Mazulos, constellations, because they're "pipes" to get us stuff, like the sun is a pipe for a lot of good stuff.
כך בחי' שערות דמזל הח' הוא בחי' צומח שבמשכיל הנ"ל להצמיח מאין כל מיני השכלות
Brings out new ideas
 והיניקה הוא בחי' הגדלת מוחין דאבא 
Giluy from mazel 8 develops brain of chochma.
והגדלת מוחין דאימא היינו ממזל הי"ג ונקה וב' מזלות הללו מזל העליון ומזל התחתון
8 and 13 are the highest and lowest of these last 6 which relate to sechel.
 הן שרשי המוחין דאו"א והוא בכח המשכיל עצמו
Within the manner which the membrane is formed is the source for how your brain will be formed. {"Within maskil יש שרש הגדלת etc."}


Part 2
 יש שרש הגדלת מוח ההבנה
Which we said refers to chochma {b'loshun ha'olam}.
 ושרש הגדלת מוח התפיסא וההשגה שהן נק' מוח אבא ומוח אימא כידוע וכמו שבחי' מוח בינה שהוא מוח התפיסא וההשגה מקבל מבחי' האין דמוח החכמה כך בשרשם ביחוד ב' מזלות דא"א ונוצר ונקה כו'
Why hisbonenus brings new chidushim from chochma - because even in their source chochma and bina are connected, so when, through effort, you bring more liquid into bina, it also goes into chochma.
Connection to modern science - they're still working on it. In general, connecting to science is tricky. 70 pages on brain in zohar, science is just starting.
 וידוע דגם שהמזלות נק' שערות21
(Hairs in the skull, not beard.)
 שנבקעים ויוצאים 
Like hairs sprout out.
רק מבחי' מותרי מו"ס דא"א
Only the mosros of the liquid, not the ikkur juice. (When we talk about chochma stima'a, their are two things which need to be kept distinct: the hair, which is like a tube, and the liquid inside it. When we talk about mosros we mean mosros of the liquid)
 אבל שרשן מעצמו' הגלגלתא22 
Even though it only comes from the leftover liquid, residue of chochma stima'a, but it's source is really from the skull itself.
שלמעל' מגוף פנימיו' המ"ס 
Kesser of arich vs chochma of arich.
שלכך נבקעו ויצאו בבחי' מותרות כמשל בקיעת הנוד סתום ביותר כו'
A tightly sealed wine skin. Some water will leak through the pores. Similarly, the skull squeezing on the membrane forces some liquid through the hairs.
 כמו החכ' כשגובר עליו כח השכל ביותר נופל ממנו נובלות
When you think hard, you don't only get a lot of good ideas, also novlos, nonsence, silly things.
{Tzurich biur. L'chora: if your thinking really hard and you come up with an incorrect understanding, it won't just be wrong, rather it'll be really wrong. Little people make little mistakes, big people make big mistakes. Perhaps like the story of the Alter Rebbe and the young man who wrote treatises in two secular wisdoms. The Alter Rebbe showed him that the yesod was wrong, so the whole thing was nonsence. But what a nonsence!
Or it could be: if someone is really straining, they sometimes crack for a second, and a random thought pops into their head. That cracking shows that their intellect is being pushed by their etzem in a very extreme way, so the novlos show on the etzem.
But if they're nonsense, why do they have any value? L'chora their high source means that really they have deeper meaning, they just look silly.
Or maybe: A programmer has a great theoretical knowlage, and is trying to apply that to a real world problem. There are three ways that he might come up with a solution.
	1) The practical could be very close to the theoretical, a "text book case". The solution to the problem is a straitforward application of his knowlage and deep understanding.
	2) A chidush. He's thinking, and he says, "You know what, this could work."
	3) Then there's a crazy chiddush. He's straining himself to figure out a way to solve a problem, and then he starts laughing because he thought of a ridiculous solution - but it just might work. What makes this chiddush ridiculous is that it totally breaks from the traditional structures of programming that his training has acustommed him to. When he looks at this solution with his abstract wisdom it looks like a joke. That's not a way that people write programs.
	But the reality that he was working with was so distant from his theoretical knowlage that he had to strain himself to an enourmous extant, and he ended up with this novlos.
	This novlos comes from maskil, but only because his maskil was being strained so much, so really we could say that it comes from higher than his intellect, from his deeper desire and pleasure.
	In other words, only the novlos of intellect reach down to the most mundane levels of reality, but the novlos only happen when the intellect is being pushed by higher than intellect (his normal thinking would never come up with such a thing), so the source of novlos is really higher than intellect.
	And this fits in very well with the explanation of the greatness of Torah, as will be explained in a moment.}
 ששרש הנובלו' יותר גבוה מגוף אור השכל
How does silliness come out of sechel? Because something higher than sechel is trying to come out, the maskil is under pressure from the skull. Shtus - that the intellect is being pushed around by the ratzon, and is formed according to it, even if it doesn't make any sence.
Now, saying silly things doesn't mean he's smart. This is like "Sichas chullin shel talmidei chochomim" - his jokes have more wisdom than his official wisdom.
Regular people have shtus because they aren't thinking.
 ולכך אמר דנובלו' חכמ' ש"מ תורה לשבח23 דוקא
It's not a put down, it's a praise. The Torah comes into all these silly physical things, how to eat and how to plant our fields. To sechel, it's novlos. But it shows that the whole point is for us, that the etzem is here, and that the etzem is connected with the chochma {,and therefor the sechel of torah comes down all the way here, novlos, kana"l b'somuch}. Principle: a higher level has to reveal its etzem in order to go to a lower level. Want to understand - teach, because your lowering it you'll have to understand it much better. And to make a wisdom practical, eg a rav to pasken, or a mashpia to advise- need to lower it even lower, connect to it even deeper.
Rebbe Rashab in samech vov: when a Rov paskens, he's afraid he might say the wrong thing. This fear causes bittul, and then you can get etzem. This applies to anyone learning in order to know what to do, or chasidus to know how to apply it to his life. Principle that the Rebbe used a lot, in Torah in general - everything, even the highest level, has to have a practical application, because {?[l'chora there's other benefits]} that's how you get to the etzem idea.
 כמ"ש במ"א


Part 3
 וכך הוא טעם מעלות ענין שרש י"ג מדה"ר שנק' בשם י"ג ת"ד24 כו' שיוצאי' ממותרי מוחא סתימאה כו'
Mosros, but we see that really it has a deeper source because it goes into lowly things. Like when he forgives us for our sins this shows on the special connection that we have to him which is higher than sechel.
 וכמ"ש ויעבור ה' על פניו ויקרא ה' ה' שהוא מלמעלה ממו"ס
{"And he passed over" - ויעבור ה' על}
 שנק' טעם וחכמה כמוסה לרצון הנעלם
Hidden reason - the geshmak you get from it. Hashem has a bechira higher than {even that} reason.
 ונק' ג"כ שכל הנעלם מכל רעיון25 או פלאות חכמ'26
These are different levels of sechel of keser, the 13 middos are higher than that {because of their source}.
 ולפ"ז כשאמר דאור אבא יונק ממזל כו' הרי זה למעלה מח"ס עצמה
Even though takeh it only recieves a little bit of left over liquid, but that comes because it's forced by higher, so it's source is higher.
 ולזה אמר הכל תלוי במזל27 אפי' ס"ת בהיכל שהוא בחי' יחוד או"א למטה
The understanding of torah down here {specifically is refered to as being dependent on mazel, because specifically here it's novlos [Ulay AK"P to the greatest extent].}
 נקודה דחכמה בהיכל' דבינה28 מאין ליש כנ"ל
Torah's source is higher than sechel, things make sence based on that source. That is to say, that really, the whole thing - torah, Hashem's connection to yidden - is higher than sechel. Makes sence because Hashem wanted it to. But when the source in mazel is revealed - like in Chasidus, then the etzem is revealed, and what would normally be silly -isn't. Like taitsching a posuk in two opposite ways and showing the connection between them - chasidus does that, because it connects to etzem sechel, higher than sechel.
 שזהו ספר וספור29
Torah - sefer, bina - sipur, according to sofer, maker, etzem.
 שנק' ס"ת בהיכל כידוע 
At this level the torah is based only on what he wants and {not on what makes sence. But} than that goes all the way down to our sensibilities; a study would show that Torah is the best way of doing things. But that's only because he decided that. Math from Hashem. Source of math, grouping different things together - because of giluy of echad, that different stuff could be giluy of a deeper unity. Just because an apple is close to another doesn't make it "two", one unit. 1+1 doesn't equal 1. 1+1=1+1. And 1+1+1=1+1+1, what's 3? There are only individual, unique apples, there's no existance of a general thing. But from echad, we have this perception of a deeper unity, we see generalities, a unity which isn't physical.


Part 4
We've explained one way that chochma receive from keser, from mazalos. Hairs are hollow, bring down some liquid. The source of the liquid {in the hair} is chochma stima'a, but the source of the {maskil limiting itself into the} hairs is in the skull, keser of arich, into which shines the 7 lower sfiros of atik. A giluy of atik in sechel! {This giluy is seen most in} Chasidus.
(Hairs: could mean hears on beard and head, or could refer to these "hairs", tubes which go through the membrane which is around the brain to the brain.)
Now for the next way that chochma receives from keser.
וזהו למעלה הרבה ממ"ש דאבא ואימא מלבישין לזרועות דא"א ומכ"ש מבחי' נה"י דא"א שמלובשין באו"א כו' להיות ידוע שבחי' ז"ת דא"א היינו רק בחי' המדות חג"ת כו' שנק' יד הגדולה ויד החזקה30 כו'
v'yad ruma - each of those yads is one of ChaGa"S of arich. Hey, HaGodul etc - because in arich is the highest giluy. MaShEi"K before, in atik, it's not revealed at all.
 ונק' ג"כ בזהר בשם טורי חשוכא (כידוע במאמר דהאי איילתא32 אזלת לטורא חשוכא ומשם ארחת מזונא
This gazelle runs to the mountains of darkness, and from there it gets its food.
 שזהו בחי' עלי' המל' בחג"ת דא"א כו'
Malchus compared to a gazelle, going up to recieve from middos of arich. 
 וכמ"ש ותרם התיבה33 כו'34
...and afterwords it rested on Mount Ararat.
 בחדש הז'35 שהוא ר"ה36
The teiva rested on the 17th, but the inyan which the teiva's journey hints to happens these days on rosh hashana.
 שעולה המל' בהרי אררט טורי קרדניתא37
middos of arich. The teiva's resting on Mount Ararat is an inyan of malchus going up to receive middos of Arich.
 כו')
 כמו הרים הגבוהים שאין אור השמש מאיר עליהם כו'
Different explanations: So tall, that one side is always dark. Or that it's snow capped. Explained in another place in chasidus: Mountains are affected by moon and sun. (l'chora similar to tides, there's also a pull on earth.) But than there are some mountains that are so big that they couldn't have been formed due to those influences, they're only around because Hashem set up the world in that way. (L'chora such that tectonic plates pushing, Himalayes, mashe'hu k'zeh.) Nimshal in person: There are emotions that can be created by intellect. Then there are emotions that can't, like mesirus nefesh. Eg the natural love of a parent to his child. It's too big to have been created from intellect, it's there because that's how we were created.
 והיינו בחי' המדות שברצון שלמעלה מן השכל וטעם גלוי משא"כ המדות שמצד השכל וטעם נק' טורי דנהורא31 דחכ' נק' אור38 כו'
Middos called mountains: mountains protrudes, also middos, something that you care about - you'll make a bigger difference, more gilluy, protrudes.
 אבל המדות שברצון נק' טורי חשוכא מדות שבהעלם הרצון
Higher than concious thought.
 ושרשם מבחי' ח"ס הנ"ל
Middos always come from sechel, but here they come from the hidden, subconcious chochma,  chochma of arich.
 שהוא הנק' תעלומות חכמה39 ענין טעם כמוס לרצון
Ta'am like taste, geshmak, because they enjoy things a certain way, their ratzon is directed davka to that thing. This is the intellect of the ratzon, gives it its form. Based on that will be his emotions, that he'll love things a particular way, not for reason, even when it doesn't make sence, it'll take precedence over any rational reason to chill out. Like the love of a parent to his child.
{How can chochma of arich have these two seemingly contradictory elements, ta'am kamus (biased) and ko'ach ha'maskil (sechel)? L'chora because the inyan of maskil is the taanug in the sechel, kana"l with the liquid etc, and that taanug has a particular form based on what he enjoys. The taanug of the ta'am kamus is the taanug of maskil. The ta'am kamus is maskil. V'ATz"I.}
{It would seem from this that a normal giluy from chochma of arich is biased. V'K"L L'chora. But l'chora that's only as it gives to middos of arich in a normal fasion. But if it's being pushed by higher than sechel KaNa"L, than through the mazalos come a giluy deeper than his biases/defined personality. V'ATz"I. V'L'chora KTz"L.}


Part 5
 שנחלק ממנו ב' קוין חו"ג שברצון כו'
Sechel can lead towards chesed or gvura, wether or not you like it. {Again, l'chora this is discussing one level of sechel of arich. MaShEi"K when that sechel is under the influence of higher than sechel KaNa"L.}
 ולזה א' דאו"א מלבישין לזרועות חו"ג דא"א
Intellect justifying a feeling. Like when a mother can't see anything bad in her son because of her great love for him, or a person's self love influencing a rationalazation for whatever he's doing. The sechel is a product of his bias. Not good or bad, it's just how it is. There will also be smart things on this level, but not the full truth. To get truth, you have to reach the first level of intellect, mazalos.
In Torah: eg Beis Hillel and Beis Shamai, paskened according their source, chesed or gvura. Then we have to pasken - that's about reaching deeper, into the source. A few maamorim in Samech Vuv, about Eilu v'eilu divrei Elokim Chayim, that they're both true, but not the whole truth. The whole truth comes from Havayeh, not Elokim, going higher, from essence {like we said earlier about mazalos}. That's where halacha comes from, in this case that the halocho is like Beis Hillel.
Any time a person has a feeling towards a certain position, and he's trying to explain why that's right, usually his intellect is operating on this level. To get to the truth, you have to go to a deeper level, mazalos, to see the element of truth which both sides have and then decide.
The middos of ratzon use the intellect as a puppet for it's position. Mazalos also make the intellect whatever it wants, but at that point there isn't a bias, you see the inner truth and the intellect can come out in any arbitrary way to explain that.
 כמו שאנו רואים שמחמת מדת החסד ואה"ר שברצון נמצא שרש לשכל וטעם לזכות ולחסד כמו השוחד יעור כו' שמחמ' השוחד שיש לו אהב' ברצון
He has a deep level for money, middos of ratzon
 ממציא טענה ומטעה כח שכלו מחוב לזכות
No matter how holy you are - this process can't be stopped. If you recieve something, your sechel will be biased.
 כמו ר"י שלקח כלכלה דפירי40 אמ' אי בעי טעין הכי כו'
A lot of stories in Baba Basra to show the power of bribes. With Rabbi Yishmael was most extreme. He had a sharecropper who would bring a basket of fruit every Friday. One Thursday he had to come into town for a court case, and since he was coming anyway he brought in his basket of fruit.  But Rabbi Yishmael ruled that it was considered a bribe and refused to judge the case. He was there while the case was being judged, and related later that the whole time he was thinking to himself, "Ah! He should have claimed this and that," different ways that this sharecropper could win.
 נמצא המדות חו"ג מלובשי' בפנימי' דאו"א ובחי' או"א מלבישי' אותן מבחוץ
Puppets, it's not really a sechel, just a ratzon.
 וכמ"ש אני בינ' לי גבור' דא"א כו'
I am bina, within me is gvura - of Arich. This posuk could also be explained as "I am bina, gvura (of Z"A) is mine".  This posuk could be reffering to bina's source, or to bina as a source.
 כמ"ש בע"ח41 וד"ל
This concludes the second level, where the intellect is biased according to his ratzon.


Part 6
 וביריד' המדריגה עוד אין מוחין דחו"ב דאצי' מקבלי' רק מבחי' נו"ה דא"א שהוא הבאת השפע דחו"ג למט' כמו נו"ה שנק' מאזני צדק בכ"מ
On every level.
 גם למט' במדות שמצד אור השכל
It's always an inyan of "I have the inyan", the ruling etc, now whats the way to bring that down to po'el? Verdict vs sentance.
 רק במדות שברצון שנק' אריכות דאנפין הן בלתי מוגבלים כמו הרצון עצמו שהוא בלתי מוגבל
In arich, no limit - you don't want a house, rather you want a mansion, etc. For example: I love my family (middos of arich) so I want to provide for them (netzach v'hod) - the providing is in an unlimited way.
This is the level of intellect that we're usually using. Not the inner truth of reality or developing your feelings towards different things, rather practical: intellect of going to work, buying groceries, etc. Based on axioms, that family is good, work, etc. Not searching for inner truth, living according to what already decided. {But sometimes, a person could question, and go again into the depth of the issue, why he decided to live his life in this way. For example, if he's gotten very caught up in his work, and one day one of his children becomes very hurt cha"v, he has "a wake up call", and questions, "wait, is this really something that I want to do?", a deeper level of intellect, l'chora from middos of arich.}

{L'hair, that b'pashtus the examples in this paragraph, as in others in this chapter perhaps, are very particular. Really, arich is more general than this l'chora. The connection of the sfiros of arich to these different forms of sechel is that they are the subconcious forces influencing his sechel to be in a particular fasion. V'yesh l'haarich b'zeh.}
 וכן ובטובך הגדול2 וכה"ג וכן אם יגאלך טוב3 ורב טוב לבית ישראל4 וכה"ג
Connects to us without limit, so always wants to give to us. Tov vs rav tov, yisod of z"a vs arich.
 משא"כ בחי' יסוד ז"א שהוא בחי' מדות שנולדים מבינה הוא בבחי' הקטנות ביותר
For a reason, only around as long as the reason is around.
 וכמ"ש במ"א בענין צדיק כתמר שזהו בחי' יסוד ז"א כארז5 בלבנון ישגה בבחי' א"ח [should be ein sof] שהוא ביסוד ע"י וא"א
Tamar - has fruit, the whole thing is for the fruit. Yisod of arich - not for what you'll get, rather it posseses inherent value. Compared to ceder tree: doesn't have fruit, the wood, the tree itself, is inherently valuable. Kind for no reason, schar mitzva mitzva, serving Hashem just because it's awesome, not for olam haba etc, ceder, the tree itself is the fruit. Levanon - lev nun, sourch of chochma and bina, 32 of bina, 50 chochma, how they reach up into etzem, appreciate the thing itself.
 וכן מ"ש בשלמה וידבר מן הארז6 אשר בלבנון עד האזוב
King Shlomo, the wisest man, spoke of everything, and when it came to plants: From the cedar to the grass on the wall, meaning everything. Means k'pshuto, also talking about yisod. Earth is malchus, plants are middos as they're connected to malchus, yisod. Cedar: yesod of atik and arich, Down to grass from wall - yisod z"a, connected to malchus, a wall, botul, inanimite thing. (Like the plants which grow from the Kosel.)
 בחי' קטנות יסוד ז"א במל' שנק' קיר7 כו' (וכידוע בכוונות דאיש"ר מברך8 דשמו גי' רצון9 ושמו הגדול
(ie "Shmei Raba".)
 בבחי' יסוד ומל' דאריך
Name - malchus. When it's connected to z"a through yisod it's called His Name.
 שיהי' מבורך באו"א וזו"נ כו' לאגברא ימינא על שמאלא10 וכמו ובטובך הגדול ישוב כו' וד"ל):
B'kitzur, asking for Moshiach: Shmei Raba - refers back to Ratzon Hakadum, ratzon for Moshiach. When Av"A and Zu"N recieve from this level, they'll always be the same. Even if we mess up - אגברא ימינא על שמאלא.
Even though this is the lowest way that mochin recieve from ratzon - but it's still according to the ratzon.