Chapter 26


Part 1
(כו) ומעתה 
That we explained the three ways that mochin gets from keser, we can explain three ways that chochma and bina work together to come up with an idea. N"Lo that these 3 depend on the last 3, that they operate on a different level depending on what they're recieving from.

pnimyus, intellect of intellect: If his desire is for the intellect, truth, not bias, than it comes from mochin of arich.
midos of sechel: puppet to justify etc emotions.
Nehiy: practical sechel, finding a way to bring what he wants into reality. {So he is interested in a true sechel - he doesn't want grandiose impossible schemes, he wants to think of something that will work. But he can't go deeper, he} can't find a new goal {which would be the pnimyus of intellect, to contemplate the nature of reality. } This is normal day to day sechel - work, breakfest, driving to the drug store, etc.

On shabbos: supposed to be operating on the level of mazalos. And really, from atik, which is melubash in the galgalta which pushes the krum/chochma stima'a/maskil {into the (limited giluy of the) mazalos}. (Like we'll say later, pnimiyus chochma pnimiyus atik.)
Talent: their sechel sees the thing as inherently good, so their intellect isn't interacting with it in a way of nehiy or chagas, rather pnimyus, the highest level of intellect. {Because it is inherently good,} even the smallest details become very important. {Eg someone who learns mishnayos because he loves it, he doesn't just get the dinim and pshat, he goes into Tosfos Yom Tov and Tosfos R' Akiva Eigar, with the occasional Chidushei Mahariach and Rasha"sh.}
The opposite, the more its just a means to an end, the more you skip over details and don't get really good at it. {Eg someone studying just to pass a test, he has no interest in knowing any details that he won't be tested on or delving any deeper than the absolute minimum.}
To be smart at everything, learn chasidus: what makes not smart is just going over things quickly without details. Eg people going through life that just aren't interested in what's going on. Or kids in school with a subject that they don't enjoy. Ex: a teacher had a student who wasn't good at math, but he was into hockey, and he knew all the statistics of all the players, could work out percentages, add up the figures in the snap of a finger. Because he loved it.
But chasidus shows you how to see Hashem in everything. So suddenly everything is interesting and important, and automatically brings out the deepest levels of your sechel. {L'chora inyan of asking a mashpia advice in relatively mundane matters: because his sechel is so given over to chasidus he sees the situation you're asking about in a very deep and real way, and advises accordingly.}[7:00]

Inyan {of this pnimyus sechel:} that the mazelos are connected to it, that you want it {itself, not that you want something else and therfor you want this}. Hair tzimtzum: whole etzem is there, but in a tiny drop. It's not the whole purpose of your existance, but it's a part of the goal, and therefor there's a big taanug in it.
Means to an end, NeHi"Y: wants to publicize his views, so learns radio etc, but those things don't really interest him.
Middos: Becomes attached to eg the statistics, and sees them as being important to his etzem view. Eg because he believes that bottled water is bad for the economy, if he see's statistics that sees to imply otherwise, he feels that he needs to interpret them according to his view. Versus his connection to the radio as a means to an end - if he can't use it, he just doesn't, and doesn't feel a need to create justifications for his not using it. He doesn't really care about it at all, he didn't give it any degree of personal importance.
B'kitzur:
Nehiy: it can't effect the etzem thing. (radio)
Chagas: it could, so he has to twist it to support. (the statistics which seem to negate his view.)

Parent loves his child, see's him doing something bad, tries to interpret that to not mean that his child has a connection to bad.
Or a person's self love covering his problems.
Intellect of driving to work, how to get money. -it's not personal, if he has to take a detour he doesn't care.
Intellect of going to work in general, in order to support your family etc. That's also not the etzem thing, but it's a sign - if you loved them, you would go to work. So it's personal, it's something that he cares about.


Part 2
יש להבין בירידת האור עוד
Light - the giluy of the person, that this different stuff is not "different stuff", it's just a giluy of him. Now we have to understand how even at mochin of Atzilus, it's still the same light, just lower etc.
 בע"ס דאו"א עצמן
Technically, this applies to any giluy of keser into mochin. But over here we're specifically talking about atzilus, because that's where you have the main inyan of a partzuf, everything coming together. Higher is before the tikkun/hiskalelus. Even A"K, which is described as being in the form of a man, is still "just" a general partzuf. Lower is a whole different catagory of limited giluy, like the livushim of thought, speech, and action. The partzufim of Atzilus are more a revalatoin of the person himself, like his personality. Like when someone studies and all his faculties are into that, that would be a partzuf of AV"A. And then he has another personality when he's relaxing with his freinds, Zu"N.  The personality behind the expression, the guy behind the intense studying or jokes, would be examples for partzufim of Atzilus. {The actions show on a deeeper source, but they themselves are already B"YA. (I almost really hope that no-one ever sees this.)}
 מבחי' פנימית המוחין דאו"א כשהן מקבלים מחו"ג דא"א ומכ"ש כשעולין לקבל ממזלות דא"א כנ"ל
Mazalos are a rare level of intellect that most people don't tap into. Even when most people philosiphize - it's really to justify what they are doing anyway, and because it's personal, they take it really personally if someone disagrees. But than you have genuis type guys, eg people who are pasionate about particular things, and love all the little details of it - that's a mazalos guy. Or someone who's really into philosiphy, and just wants truth, not justification, "l'shmuh". The ultimate level of this "mazalos guy" is expressed in the learning chasidus.
 לבחי' חיצוני' נה"י דאו"א שמלובשין במוחין דז"א11 וכמ"ש בע"ח.
Last chapter were three different ways that keser gives, now three different ways that sechel can recieve.


{Now we get into the explanantion}
 והענין ידוע כמו שבת וי"ט הן בבחי' פנימית המוחין דאו"א
They are a moshul for pnimyus Av"A.
 כי השבת נק' קודש12 בעונג דחכ' מלה בגרמיה14
"(Shabbos is called holy,) with taanug, because chochma (is a thing for itself)." Kodesh: seperate, doesn't need anything else. It has it's own taanug. It's holy with taanug, and therefore independent, a thing for itself.
Work vs rest, leisure: Lesiure: you like it, it's inherently good, so you'll do it even if you're not getting payed. Work - you don't really want to, but you eg need money, so you'll do it anyway.
Shabbos and Yomtov: inyan of leisure. Difference: Shabbos is rest of chochma, and yomtov of bina. Shabbos chochma has fun, and on yomtov binah. You could use chochma to figure out how you're supposed to act or to make money etc. On shabbos it takes a break, does what it likes to do, to just think about Hashem. During the week - "b'chochma isbareru", with chochma he sifts through all the stuff he bumps into, figures out what is good and what is bad, and wether the bad posseses an element of good or vice verca. But on shabbos you look at the world in a way of "Kol dorechecha do'ehu", that everything is inherently good, and all you have to do is see it, don't need to work and refine. Which is why on shabbos you can enjoy the taste, because even that is now holy.
During the week a mitzva to be mivarer, shabbos a different mitzva. Like if you're playing a game of basketball - you can't just say, "ah, it's just a game, who cares if I mess up or if he fouled that other guy"- you have to take it seriously, otherewise it messes up the game. But after, when your looking back, or watching a video, you want to enjoy the entire thing, even the messups ("That was funny."), and not be a sore sport etc.
Also us: 6 days a week work in the world, and shabbos relax, we're not playing the whole "world" game anymore. And even the hisbenenus is different, it's not to mivarer middos, just into Hashem.


Part 3
 והוא בחי' פנימית אור אבא
1) The mazalos are activated when he's doing something that he's really into
2) The person is most revealed by chochma when it's doing that.
 (שהוא פנימי' ע"י15 וזה שנאמר וקראת לשבת עונג16 וכמ"ש במ"א בענין ג' סעודו' דשבת17 באריכות)
Three: chakal tapuchin kadishin, atik yomin, and zeir anpin.
 וי"ט נק' מקרא קדש18
Shabbos is called "holy", yomtov is called "called holy". It itself isn't {connected to} the holiness {directly}, rather it receives from the hispashtus of the kedusha {, as will be explained why yomtov is connected to simcha, and as is understood that bina doesn't have a bittul to the thing itself like chochma has, rather as that thing spreads out into pratim.}.
On shabbos chochma is in a state of rest, on yomtov only the bina is resting, chochma is still busy, which is why borer for ochel nefesh is ok. {When chochma is in a state of rest, it has no shaychus to the world. As the Mittler Rebbe will write soon, that chochma resting means that it's operating on the level of pnimiyus, co'ach mah, which means the bittul of chochma, where it tottally doesn't feel it's own metzius, it's just connecting to the thing. This takes place on Shabbos. So there is no need for any connection the physical world, and on the contrary - any malacha would disturb that bittul, that unity, of chochma.
But on Yom tov, chochma isn't resting, only bina, so chochma is active, in a state of a yesh (l'ifi erko), trying to grasp elokus. It does that by seeing elokus through the world, so it needs to have some sort of shaychus to the world. That's why yom tov needs} Ochel nefesh - physical stuff to percieve elokus through that. {And that doesn't disturb the rest of bina, because even pnimyus bina, omek hamusag, is still bina, and bina is fueled by pratim- every prat helps give it a deeper understanding. But that's specifically working with the pratim that it already has. To incorporate new pratim into it's hasagah is a strain, as will be explained about issur nolad on yom tov. MaSh"K on shabbos: any work of bina would certainly disturb chochma, which on shabbos isn't interested in any connection the world, KaNa"L.}
Chumra on yomtov: nolad. Because bina wants to analyze what it already has, to have to deal with new things disturbs the rest of bina. But shabbos is chochma, and the whole thing of chochma is coming up with new things, so nolad is ok.
 בחי' שמחה13
Shabbos is the giluy of taanug directly, oneg. Yomtov: hispashtus of that, simcha, when it comes into your yeshus. Chochma: you lose yourself in the thing, botul to it. Bina: in your kelim, hasaga, you have it, so simcha, because you have this great thing.
 כמ"ש אם הבנים שמחה19
Mother of children: simcha from children, who are outside of her. {MaShEi"K chochma: botul to the thing.} Mikra, calling, connecting something seperate. It doesn't mean applying divine wisdom to practical, every day life; that's what we do during the week. Rather finding things that represent elokus, that you can grasp. Eg explanations, analogies, etc. That's what our intellect does, find ways to get a hold of the idea. So mikra kodesh: finding ways to connect to kodesh through the yomim tovim, but not the thing itself. Which is why yomtov has mitzvos and shabbos doesn't. Because on yomtov we're trying to find ways to express our connection to Hashem, whereas on shabbos - it's just there, we don't have to do anything. Even saying kiddush - not the mitzva d'oraysa. You have to recognize that Hashem made the world and rested on shabbos. Doing it verbally helps that. Not like lulav and esrog etc. Just eat stuff that you like, because it's all a giluy. On shabbos - if you can't stand wine, don't drink it. But on yom tov, you have to have it anyway, because you need simcha, "v'ein simcha ela b'yayin".
(Yomtov: in a way, like connecting the week to shabbos. Like matza, the essential emuna, sukka, that the mitzvos are temporary, not intrinsicly important, we're really into Hashem himself.)
 שהוא בחי' מוחין דאימא שמקבל מאבא
{tz"b} {l'chora: bina has simcha, "Aim habanim" bina "sumaycha", when it's mekabel from chochma, when it obtains the connection that it's searching for. Because obviously it doesn't just want the symbols etc - it wants the spiritual light behind them, the chochma behind the pratim.}

 כי השביתה דשבת הוא בחכ' ג"כ

{tz"b} {l'chora recapping the previous discussion: shabbos and yomtov aren't just days off, when our hands and feet don't have to work, and our emotions don't get awakened by annoying coworkers and difficult customers. Rather, as was discussed, there's something deeper: the rest of shabbos is also in chochma, meaning that it operates on a more pnimyus level, doing what it wants to do, kana"l, and the rest of yomtov is in pnimyus bina also, besides for all the other things that observing yomtov means.}
 דהיינו בפנימית אבא בחי' כח מ"ה אין דחכמה קודם שמתפשט ליש בהשגה דבינ'
On shabbos giluy of co'ach mah of chocham, the perception of the thing before you can explain it. Just seeing it as it is, without interpreting it.
There's a book, "Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain", which basically describes the difference between chochma and bina. He writes over there, in effect, that in order to draw you have to be in chochma mode. Meaning, you have to see the whole thing, not the parts. For example, when you look at a face, most people, say "Ok, here's a nose, here's two eyes, hair, ears, etc", and then they try to draw those named parts. The problem is that most of the details don't have names, they aren't recognized by bina. So those details are lost, and the face doesn't look right. What you have to do is see the abstract, colors and shades, not noses and eye lashes. {This last shtikle was actually notes, vs transcript. B'E"H this technique will develop.} Atik revealed in bina: the details that you see show what you care about. Like the famous blotch test. The chochma see's the thing, the bina see's it according to his priorities and personality etc.


Part 4
 וכן בינה בבחי' פנימי' הוא עומק נקודת המושג כו'
Focus on the inner point, not the proofs. That's the biggest geshmak to bina. But bina is still into asociations. For example, it's having fun, it's yomtov - but what does haveing fun mean? It needs some sort of something to asociate having fun with, so there's particular mitzvos, along with only a limited amount of work allowed on yomtov. Whereas chochma - it doesn't need any pratim, it can have fun with anything.
 כידוע שיש אין חכמה20 בבינה ובינה בחכמה
At their inner point, chochma and bina connect. Bina: your trying to understand the thing itself, which is the chochma. Always together. Chochma: a bit of bina, eg this inyan has to be distinguished from other stuff {wheras chochma blends things together}.
 והיינו הבן בחכמה וחכם בבינה21
That the chochma has the ability to lower the inyan into explanations etc, and bina has the ability to go up from the explanations and reach the chochma.
 שזהו בחי' יחוד פנימי' דאו"א
When they work together just to get to the inner truth etc, mazalos - that's the inner yichud of Av"A.
Physical father and mother: 1) Spending time together, just enjoying each other's company without any reason or purpose. The man, chochma, has to reach down to bina, like finding representations for his love, flowers, notes, verbalazation {"Why do I have to say it? You know that I love you!" - wrong attitude.} 2) The goals - have a family, raise children 3) doing taxes and dishes, not a goal, a practical neccesasary thing.


{Now to chagas/nehiy of av"a}
 משא"כ בחיצונית השפע דחו"ב בחג"ת נה"י כו' כמו מדות שבחכמה שנק' בחי' ו"ק דאבא22
The way the chochma is expressed in a particular way. Eg: you learn a din. But then when something happens - it goes from abstract to a particular time and space, into the vuv kitzavos. (Acting on precedent is the opposite proccess, deriving the klall from the prat.)
 כמו חסד שבחכמה דהיינו כח שכל המטה כלפי חסד או כח שכל אחר שמטה כלפי דין כו'
You can use intellect to prove emotions, but that's not what intellect is really about.
 ומאירי'
The middos of chochma
 בחו"ג דבינה שהוא בא בהשגה בטוב טעם בהסבר לזכות ולחוב ונק' מדו' שבשכל המושג קודם שנולדו במהות בפ"ע (כמשי"ת)
In z"a.


Part 5
 וכאשר אינו מוצא טעם בהסבר השגה ומ"מ לא יוכל לומר בהיפוך כי שכלו מטה כך היינו בבחי' חו"ג דאבא קודם שמאיר מאין ליש בבינה (כמו ענין שתיק רב23 כו')
The gemara of nolad, couldn't prove his positition - shasik rav, rav was silent- but he didn't change his mind.
 (והשתיקה סייג לחכ'24
simple teitch - to learn, be quiet and listen. But why fence? Fence implys to protect. But simple teitch means that you won't have anything to protect without it.
Deeper: if you have a chochma: if you don't give a reason, that protects it. Once you say a reason, it's open for discussion. So- when arguing, first say your conclusion, then your arguments. Rabbi Holander was going to debate a reform "Rabbi", and asked the Rebbe how to do this without giving legitimacy to him. The Rebbe told him that he should open his debate with a very clear statement that "I do not agree with you at all and I do not recognize you as a Rabbi. Now lets talk." Meaning regardless of the debates conclusion - this is axiomatic, even if I can't prove it. So the silence, the desciveness of chochma, protects it.
Or: when your reaching into the chochma, you have to be quiet, looking for reasons etc disturbs the flash of chochma, you just have to be quiet and "soak it in" for a bit.
 משתוקא בתרין25
[5:08] claim vs quiet. quiet better. chasidus quiet - not explanation, as it is. But gives double
A legal thing. It could sometimes happen that someone can make a claim and make eg $100 - but if he hadn't made a claim he would have made eg $200. Deeper: the silence gives understanding. Chasidus isn't an interpratation, its elokus as it us. But because of this "quiet" element, you end up getting double, understanding better {,even though you lack the interpretation}.
 מפני שעולה ביטול כח מ"ה דחכ' זה למקור המוציא כל השכלות שנק' ח"ס כנ"ל ומוציא משם השכלה חדש' כו')
Because there is bittul to the idea, looking at it as it is, reach the source of intellect and can take out from there in any way, because it doesn't have a set form. But once you attach a form to it - it's stuck. Eg hard to create something new from it, because you see it in one form, have difficulty seeing that it could also exist in another context.


{Nehi"y}
 ובחי' נה"י דאבא היינו בחי' מאזני השכל והחכמה איך שיבא הדבר חכ' לידי השפעה בבחי' כליות יועצות כו'
Verdict vs sentance - chaga"s reaches a conclusion, innocent or guilty, nehi"y says how to express that verdict in reality, "what are we going to do about it." Netzach - give whatever it is that your giving to the highest degree, either punishment or reward etc. Hod - to show restraint. Eg give lashes - netzach leans to giving all, hod says less, for different reason, eg to avoid killing him. Court: first offender, especially young - they try to be leniant, they want him to shape up, not rot away in prison. But second, third - you throw the book at him. Inyan of advising kidneys.
 (והיינו ענין התוקף שיש במוח
Strong minded, confident in his position.
 שנק' תקיף בדעתו כמו הרגלים שיש בהן כח להקים כל הגוף כך בחי' נו"ה דאבא מקימין לגוף המוחין ולהיפוך כשאינו תקיף בדעתו בקל יפול מסברתו מחוב לזכות ומטמא לטהור כו' וכן בנו"ה דאמא)
Someone who's confident in the rightness of his position will act accordingly. Vs pluralistic liberal who can't do anything, because he can always see the other side. Legs - stand up for what you believe in. In order to have a legal system, you have to be confident enough in your opinion to punish someone accordingly.
Something can always be explained in another way, nehi"y sets up a course of action. Lav davka is it machria the right one, but says that it's better to do something and stick to it then flip flop in theorys forever. There are particular times for cheshbon hanefesh, but in general - you have to do, not continuasly second guess yourself. Nehi"Y is about doing.


Part 6
 ודרך כלל הרי רק מבחי' נה"י דאבא שמלובשים בנה"י דאימ' משם נמצא מקור המוחין לז"א שהן בחי' המדות שלמטה מן השכל (כמשי"ת)
Midos has sechel directing it. Ususally, that sechel isn't a deep analysis into the nature of reality and the meaning of reality, rather that stuff he's already thought about, and now he's doing.
Someone has a love for his family, so goes to work. At work inyan of nehiy - he can't be thinking all the time about why he's doing this, he has to be thinking about how to do his job in the best way possible.
Nehiy of abba - a feeling of how things are supposed to be done. Into nehiy of imma. Discussed more at length when we get to middos.
 וידוע פרטי עניני יחודים דאו"א בין כשהוא בבחי' הפנימי' לצורך עצמן שהוא בבחי' ג"ר שבהן 
Chabad of chabad. Chochma and binah coming together to understand, not to apply.
קודם שמתפשטים במדות עדיין כו' ובין כשמתייחדים לצורך מוחין חדשים לזו"נ שהוא בבחי' נה"י לבד כו'
A worker has a problem - asks the manager. Because he just works in a set way, he doesn't have the authority to figure out something new, he has to go the manager, who formulates a new thing for zu"n. This formulation is chitzonyus av"a.
 וזהו ההפרש בין שבת לחול כו'
On shabbos: not learning to know how to act, l'shmo, just getting to know Hashem. But during the week - refining middos, chasidus to have a practical effect, halacha to know how to act.
 (ובק"ש הכוונה בה' אלקינו היינו בפנימי' דאו"א26
Kavanah to our esential connection to Hashem. Hashem Elokeinu - we don't have to create a connection, it's there. The pnimyus yichud Av"A. Only Elokeinu would mean that we have to work to create it.


Part 7
 שמשם ה' אחד יחוד דזו"נ27
To see Elokus within creation, that he controls everything him, middos going into malchus. Once there's the inner yichud, nothing besides him, so obviously everything that happens is because he decided so, hasgacha protis.
 כשבא להם בחי' תוס' מוחין חדשי'
This perception is from new mochin. Problems from not understanding. When realizes that really Hashem runs the world, no reason to be mispa'el from obstacles to our Avodah.
 כדי שיוכלו להוליד כו' והיינו במס"נ דק"ש
Reveal his essential connection to Hashem, independent of anything that he does, than he can fix everything up. Tshuva of Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur - the connection. Then we can can take that indestructible connection and put it into torah and mitzvas with mesirus nefesh, because that's the reality and nothing can stop you.
Moshul: child can't have children untill a certain level of etzem is reached, feels his own etzem, then can give it. Nimshal: after mochin chadashim, then can put that into his avodah.
 משא"כ בתורה ומצות בלא מס"נ
Doesn't reveal the etzem.
 אין היחוד רק בחיצוניות דאו"א בזו"נ28
Not that they see this as being who they are. {Rather it's for a reason, he'll get reward, this is what everyone else is doing, etc.} Doesn't change him, he acts within his comfort zone, and in turn Hashem doesn't change teva for that. MaShEi"K someone who's not mispa'el from nature, Hashem's ratzon has to happen - in turn nature is made not to get in his way. Like a shliach who just gets away with crazy stuff.
 כמ"ש במ"א וכמו בענין עשרה הרוגי מלוכה שהעלו מ"ן לאו"א29 בבחי' הפנימי' ע"י מס"נ
דוקא)
Enough Ma"D to last us untill yemos hamoshiach. They were only for Hashem, yechida, whole purpose is to reveal that, they did. Teaching: student puts in effort, Ma"D, teacher automatically more into it. Ma"N to pnimyus Av"A: simple complete dedication to Hashem. Eg dedication to the subject vs to the teacher.


Part 8
 (וזהו ענין יחוד או"א עילאין ויחוד או"א תתאין שהוא יש"ס ותבונה כמ"ש למעלה בענין בינה ותבונה30 באריכות ובחי' יש"ס הוא ו"ק דאבא ותבונה ו"ק דאימא שנק' או"א תתאין
The inner and more practical side of chochma and bina are reffered to as the yichud of the higher and lower Av"A, Husband and Wife, the more spiritual side to their relationship, personality, etc. Vs Father and Mother, the the "lower" father and mother, children, family, etc, more physical.
 ויש עוד יש"ס למעלה גם מאו"א עילאין שהוא ו"ק דח"ס דא"א31 ותבונה ו"ק דבינה דא"א שמשם נמשך שורש יחוד או"א עלאין בבחי' ג"ר שבהן כו')
Tvuna vs bina: shulchan aruch vs gemara. Bina vs chochma: recognize reason for the desicion or not, shusik Rav. It would seem that application is lower than application, but if you go a bit deeper, the real intent of the Torah is to be in the real world, practical. Parents: yes, there's a refined and deep spiritual side to their relationship, but the reason they came together - they aren't just freinds, they want to have a family.
 והנה כאשר נמשך מאו"א מוחין לזו"נ בשביל תולדות הנשמות צריך להיות היחוד באו"א בפנימי' המוחין בשרשם בב' מזלות דא"א (והיינו בני כו' במזלא תליא32 כו')
Gr"A: to pasken, need to know inner part of the Torah. Need to know the real spirit of the law in order to always bring it to Ma'aseh right. It's not enough a book of halacha - there will always be things which aren't directly dealt with, you have to have a feeling of what's appropriate, what does Hashem like. That's an inyan of having a "soul" in halacha, life. So comes from deepest intellect.
Also with a soul - in order to be a living, changing thing, Hashem has to put his etzem in it, needs to come from the innermost levels of intellect, mazelos, when there isn't yet a set tziyur on the sechel. Have physical children: reach to where not a set form. Like stem cells, could be anything. Reach to the etzem of your chayus, to bring forth undefined which could become anything.


Part 9
 כמ"ש במ"א שזהו ענין אל עליון
Lit. Upper G-d, but Kel is inyan of power, so upper power, or upper force.
 עליית אור פנימית אבא כשמקבל ממזל ונוצר כו'
Kel - chochma. Kel elyon - chochma going up to its source, mazel v'notzer.
 אז גומל חסדים טובים בבחי' יסוד שנק' קונ' הכל להוליד תולדו' בזו"נ
When you have the essence of the idea, kel elyon, then the kindness is good. Vs good intentions, but not working out so well. And aquires, meaning finds expression in other things, is appliable. Here, that the etzem goes into a child, who is seperate from you. Because if you go deep enough, you don't have to be you - you could have just as well been him. And at that level you could be the source of a child.
 וזהו וזוכר חסדי אבות ומביא גואל לבני בניהם33 כו' 
Remember Avos, source, than can bring ge'ulah to the children, inyan of neshama. Kana"l with having children.
Gevura of Avos - how sechel is limited, structured. Chasdei Avos - it's connected to the source, can be expressed in any way.
Children - midos, grand children - avos.
והמשל בזה ידוע כמו איש שהוא חכם מופלג ביותר כאשר יודע לעומק השכל ממקור חוצבו דוקא אז יכול להיות משפיע לנמוך ביותר גם לתינוק קטן לעשות צירופים חדשים באופן השכלת השכל ההוא לא כהוויתו דוק' וכן ביכולתו לחדש שכל אחר להוליד מחדש מחמת זה השכל
He has the etzem, so he's not limited to any particular form.
 משא"כ מי שאינו חכם מופלג ואינו תופס רק החכמה והשכל דברים כהוויתן לבד די להפקיע להשיגו לעצמו בלבד אבל לא יוכל להוליד חדשו' ממנו כלל
He just see's it as it is. He doesn't look at the idea and see how it can be turned into other things. {For example programming: you can have someone who can twist a language into doing things that even its designers didn't think of.}
 וכ"ש שלא יוכל להוריד ולהשפיל הסבר השכל להבינו לתינוק כו'
He can't even reach an expression of the idea as it exists on his level, eg a chiddush, so for sure he can't apply it to a lower level.
 ונמצא שבחי' נה"י דחכמ' שהוא בחי' יסוד הכח המשפיע למקבל
The ability to teach.
 תלוי בכח המשכיל מקור חוצב השכל מאין ליש דוקא כו'
{K'muvan, everyone has a ko'ach hamaskil. The inyan here is that} he taps into that ko'ach, the etzem of the idea, and so can apply it kana"l. Want to understand chasidus: teach it.
 וכך הוא בענין תולדות הנשמות מבחי' נה"י שאינו מוליד כ"א בתוס' כח במקור המוחין שלו מלמעלה מעלה מן השכל כו' והוא הטעם שבשביל תולדות נשמות ע"י יחוד או"א צריך להיות מלמעלה ממקור המוחין דאו"א שזהו מבחי' מזלות דח"ס שהוא למעלה גם מחכמה ובינה דא"א עצמו כנ"ל והיינו טעם ליחוד פנימית דאו"א בליל שבת קודש מפני שהוא בשביל להוליד נשמות שלכך אז דוקא זמן זיווגא דחכימין34 שהן ת"ח שנק' קודש
The Torah scholars are called kodesh.
 ושבת שרשו בקודש העליון בחי' פנימית אור אבא כנ"ל
Their inyan is pnimyus Av"A, torah l'shma etc, so they have a special connection to Shabbos.
 וד"ל: