Chapter 24


{I've spent way too much time working on part 3. I wounder how much I'm stam hawking a chaynik.}
Part 1


{The Mittler Rebbe starts out with the connection between keser and etzem}
(כד) והנמשל מכל הנ"ל למשכיל למעלה יובן איך שבחי' עצמות התענוג הפשוט שבעצמות אא"ס קודם הצמצום הוא הנק' שעשועי המלך בעצמותו15 שהוא בבחי' א"ס ממש 
Ratzon - the etzem has an interest in lowering itself, expressing itself in a particular form. This could be either within himself (ratzon atzmi) {which is being discussed now}, his essential middos, which is a yeridah {, that this one particular mida could express me him}. Or it could be outside (ratzon murkav).
Taanug - when that thing actually shows on the etzem b'poel. {L'chora, in addition to actualizing the external definition of the desire. E.g. in the persuit for a meaningful life: somebody thinks that working 80 hours a week as a lawyer will be awesome, than he gets down to it... and b'poel, it's not so great. The taanug comes when the thing is both done and actually expresses the etzem.}
And this taanug in the etzem is called שעשועי המלך בעצמותו
וגם בי"ס העצמיים שהוא כתר ועד מל' דא"ס הכל מבחי' העונג הפשוט שבעצמותו
They only exist because the etzem sees them as expressing itself. {Mifaret difference between שעשועי המלך בעצמותו and keser of Ei"S.}
 עד"מ שגם החסד העצמי שבנפש עיקר קיומו העונג כו'
{As was discussed in the last chapter.}
 ועכ"ז באמת הרי עצמות אא"ס מובדל גם מבחי' תענוג פשוט רק שנמשך ומאיר בבחי' העונג כמו שעצמות הנפש תומשך אחר העונג כו'
This whole taanug thing is an inyan of giluy from ma'or. {L'chora kana"l that taanug is all about drawing the soul out into other stuff. U'muvon u'poshut that on a level beyond having a connection to outside stuff there's no reason for this inyan of taanug.} But Hashem himself is greater than just being a ma'or, just that he could also do that. {So taanug is an important part of ma'or, but to Hashem, it's no great shakes.} {I think that's what he means.}
 ולזה אמר אין לך למעלה מן העונג כו'
"Higher than oneg" reffers to Atzmus Or Ein Sof {l'chora because that's what's, kana"l b'sumouch, drawn after the oneg}. This can't be reffered to as being higher or lower, closer to or farther from revelation. {So you can't draw a map and say, "Atzmus is above keser", it's as much above keser of Atzilus as it is above a plastic bottle cap. It's totaly beyond any kind of giluy, it's not an inyan of giluy.} So they said "אין לך למעלה מן העונג", because there's no level of giluy which is higher than oneg.
 וכמו בבחי' חפץ חסד שבעצמות 
That he could reveal himself as a creator
שיש בו תענוג הפשוט הוא נמשך ומאיר בתוס' אור עד שיורד ובא גם בדבר נבדל שהוא בבחי' תענוג והרצון הקדום הנ"ל שאחר הצמצום להיות מקור להשתלשלות דאבי"ע
Because of that taanug before tzimtzum, descends to actually makeing a world, which inyan of ratzon kadum is something which is al kul panim seperate{ish}. 
 עד שיורד ונמשך בסיום הכל והוא גם בפרט דע"ס היותר אחרון שבאצי'
Even down to the day to day things like weather, there's a taanug in organizing that.
 עד"מ הנ"ל בעונג הנמצא לקיום מדת הניצוח וכה"ג

Like in a person - the {essential} pleasure that he has in winning spreads out into every tiny detail of winning, into practice, victory dance, etc.


{Now he get's into keser, that it goes into every detail of creation, pnimi, and it's also makif.}
 וז"ש בע"ח דע"י וא"א שהוא התענוג והרצון שמהות א' הם ואין זה בלא זה (ונק' ג' רישין דמתגלפין17 דא לגו מן דא כו'
{Three heads which switch(?) this one inside of this one.}
 ולפעמים זה פנימי כו' כנ"ל) מלובש תוך כל ספי'16 וספי' בפרטי פרטו' שבלעדו אין לו קיום כלל כנ"ל באריכות
Even the smallest detail is only there because {kesser is there, which means kana"l that} this detail reveals him in a particular way. And if he doesn't decides that he wants it, {i.e he doesn't feel that this thing expresses him,} than he won't want it, no matter how awesome it looks.

{Even morality - it looks good, right? So l'chora that would inherently express Hashem? R.W. (based on classical sources) investigates.} Is it moral because that's what Hashem commanded, or was the command because it's moral? This is the same question as which is first, atik or arich. The answer to both questions is that to the etzem it's the same thing, we can't say which is first.
On the one hand, it's good because Hashem said so, and if he had said that what we consider to be bad is good {like when he commanded Avrohom to shecht Yitzchak} than that would be good. So it's good because he decided, his ratzon is first.
But at the same time, he choose this morality because of the special qualities that it has. So he choose it because it's good, the taanug/morality is first.
So both - what we call good is good because of the choice, and he made that choice because it's good. {Or, to use taanug/ratzon terminology: he has a ratzon for something because it has qualities which will give him taanug, but these qualities only give him taanug because he has a ratzon. So which is first? Kana"l, that there the same thing, like two sides of one coin.} {And this that we see it as being moral doesn't imply any inherent quality.} It's just that in this instance {in contrast to a chok} Hashem wanted the choice to be because of morality's qualites {and that we should recognize those qualities}.
Length, orech of da'as: the interest extends to find vessels, for example with a da'as in sports, to get all the paraphanelia, different ways of connecting to it. Da'as of k'dusha: a person has to be a fan of Hashem, and then anything which could have a connection to him becomes very valued. Torah l'shma, Hiddur mitzva. To want tangable expressions of that connection.



Part 2
 וגם הוא מקיף את כולם
Yes, it's meluvash, get's a particular taanug from different particular things, but really It's higher than all of them, could go into anything. Eg a ratzon to be happy, which he than connects to whatever. Each of those things becomes important, but that's just the middos of the ratzon. The inner level of the ratzon doesn't need any of those things. Like a person choosing his path in life, programmer teacher shliach accountant - he could do anything, but than he has to choose one particular thing. Like we say about the etzem, that it's higher than everything and goes into everything. (That's what chasidus tries to reveal, how really everything is a giluy.)
 (וכמ"ש במ"א במשל י' חפירות18 זה אחר זה שהראשונה נמשכת בתוך כל חפירה וחפירה כו'
If you fill up the first pit with water, it'll fill up and then flow into all the rest, one at a time. Water is a moshul for keser, first fills up chochma, than flows into bina etc, fits, changes according to the vessel - but it's still the same water, aloof.
 וכך אמר בזהר עבד מנא רברבא19 וקארי בה גרמי' חכים כו' 
"He made many garments, and called them {garmeih - his bones(vessels)? as in ihu v'garmuhi chad?} wisdom etc." - The etzem of all of them is same, Hashem, just that expressed in different ways, like wearing different garments. Like at Har Sinai saw Hashem as a sage, at the yam suf a warrior. One time garment of chochma, once netzach, but same Eibishter.
וכן מ"ש אפיק' י' תיקונין20 וקרינן לון י"ס כו')
"Made ten garments, called them ten sfiros".


{Now he explains how keser could be both makif and pnimi. It's makif because it's the end of the world of the infinite m'tzad atik, and it's pnimi m'tzad arich, the "head" of the emanated.}
{First atik.}
 להיות כי בחי' ע"י נחשב מסוף עולם הא"ס21 עדיין לפי שעולם הא"ס נחשב עד בחי' מל' דא"ק שהוא בחי' אותיות וסוף מעשה שעלה במח' ורצון הקדום הנ"ל
[5:08]Olem ha'ain sof - there's a choice, anything could be. Even until malchus of A"K, and sometimes we'll say even more limited levels, are considered from olem ha'ein sof. Because even if you have an ultimate limitation, two choices, there could still be a giluy. Even "here's a paper and pencil, draw a tree" - seems like there's only one thing to do, but really it can be done in any way. {Even in the most pressing of circumstances, where it would seem that someone has no control of what happens in his life, he can find some small way to express himself in meaningful way.}.
{That's in general. Here, though, we say that already the limitation of arich, which lacks the degree of connection to A"K that atik has, is no longer considered "olem ha'ein sof".}
 והוא בחי' אחרונה שבעצמו' שנעשה כתר דע"י
He choose this form of A"K, including the lowest level of A"K. That lowest level became Atik, so atik can be anything according to his unrestricted choice as much as A"K can. And if there's choice, there's giluy, kana"l.
 שזהו בחי' גלוי אור העונג מהעלם העונג ורצון קדום הנ"ל
(Earlier the connection between iggulim and yosher was discussed.)
 ע"כ גם כתר דע"י וחו"ב ומדות שבו הכל נחשב מסוף עולם הא"ס

{And now to Arich}
 אבל בחי' א"א שהוא בחי' גלוי הרצון שבא מחמת העונג להיותו נמשך ובא להתפשט למט' כו'
{Arich is drawn down, connects to that particular thing, whereas atik remains makif. It's not directly connected to this thing - just like this could give him that taanug, so could something else.}
 הוא הנק' ראש ושרש הנאצלי' שהן ע"ס דאצי' בכלל ובפרט 
Now its relatively seperate, it's just a matter of getting it done, it's not the etzem taanug which exists independently of anything else. {It's not "me", al kul panim to the same extent as atik.}
{L'chora: eg a person gives a dollar to a poor man. There are two things going on: the taanug from being kind, and the desire to be kind.
The taanug is when he does something and he feels like this is expressing himself. Whereas if he does something but isn't sure if it's the right thing to do, he doesn't have the same taanug. For example if after he walks away from the poor guy he thinks to himself, "Was that really a good idea? Maybe..." This taanug in kindness is the same for any sort of kindness he does. Sometimes it'll be more, if he really feels like it's the right thing to do, but it's the same taanug. The taanug is makif, it has a relationship to the giluy of chesed, but without changing, relating to all the giluyim the same way.
In the ratzon, however, there are changes, it's according to what has to be done in this situation. A ratzon to give a poor man a coat is different than the ratzon to give a freind who looks like he's not haveing a good day a smile. The ratzon is pnimi, it's enlothed within the giluy of chesed.}

{Now: because it's makif and pnimi, end and beginning, therefor keser is called a memutza, an "in between" level}
ולזה נק' בחי' הכתר בכלל בחי' ממוצע שיש בו מבחי' אחרונה שבעצמו' והוא ראש לנאצלים 
{Now explains that even though takeh it seems seperate, but it must be that the etzem taanug is over there, because if it wasn't than this giluy wouldn't exist.}
כי אורו' הנאצלים שהן בחי' גילוי ההעלם הרי הן בבחי' נבדל מן העצמות כנ"ל (באות י"ב)1
(Supposed to be (באות י"ט).) Eg this that someone is kind comes from his etzem, it's not influenced-by/dependant-on anything outside of him. But a particular thing of kindness depends on circumstance, eg wether the guy needs shoes or a sandwhich, so there's not so much of a choice in the matter. (But also that could be called from olam ha'einsof, because within that structure there could be an infinite variety. {But it isn't called that here.})


Part 3
 וכמו עד"מ המדו' חו"ג בדבר נבדל שבאין מכח המדות חו"ג שבעצם כו'
The way the person's being kind is expressed in something else, it's seperate, it might not be so obvious that it's a chesed. Like someone who sees a surgery. Purpose of studying seder hishtalshelus is to see the connection between levels, the essence is going from step to step, the whole thing is the etzem.
 ועכ"ז בחי' התענוג והרצון שבא מן העצמו' הוא מלובש תוך כל להיות קיומם תמיד כנ"ל מפני ששרש זה התענוג והרצון בעצמות אא"ס שנק' שעשועי המלך בעצמו כו'
The source of every {taanug in a} particular thing is the etzem, that Hashem wants to reveal that {inyan of himself.}
 וכמשל הנפש שנמשך אחר כל עונג כו' שמזה ראי' שהעונג ממלא אורה כו'
{L'chora perush ממלא אורה: that the soul is "alive", interested in going outside of itself. Wheras if someone is cha"v depressed, they aren't "full of light", in a state suitable for revelation, rather choshcho oruh, his light is darkened, he retreats into himself, kana"l.
This is within himself. Because of this, he is able to be "נמשך", to go out of himself.}
{L'chora the raya is that if taanug is enough to get the soul outside of itself, certainly it's enough to create a giluy within himself.}
{Behind these two things (the miluy or and the nimshach) is that the soul sees this thing as expressing itself (the "third head" kana"l). So the deeper meaning of} taanug is that that the soul is expressed through this, and the more it is expressed by it, the greater the taanug and the  {more he's nimshach to it, which is expressed in his} interest.
 א"כ גם מזה עצמו הוא הטעם שהעונג פרטי שבכל פרט מן האורו' הוא עיקר קיומו כו'
{L'chora: The soul is drawn after taanug. But that isn't a proof that taanug is the whole chayus of every prat. Maybe once he has the taanug, other faculties can take over. But nimshach's being a raya that taanug is ממלא אורה, shows it's great significance, without it choshcha orah. Now that we see nimshach's importance, it could also be a proof that the taanug is constantly needed.} {Why not bring proof from mimaleh orah? L'chora that's a strictly internal thing, MaShEi"K nimshach is obviously connected to outside, so it could be a raya of importance to outside.} 
{Taanug from something (means that the soul sees that thing as expressing itself and therefor it is what) causes giluy. And this would be true of any taanug, even a particular thing like giving a poor guy a dollar. The taanug is connected to the soul's interest, so the absence of taanug means that there's no interest in this giluy, so the giluy isn't going to happen, the poor guy won't get his dollar.} What does the soul get out of it? The taanug, which we explained is from its self being revealed. So what keeps everything existing is the taanug of Hashem in that thing, that it reveals him. Which is why klipah has a weak existance, like a shadow, because it tries to be against Hashem's ratzon and taanug.
 עד גם בבחי' מל' שהוא ההתנשאות לולי התענוג שבו אין לו קיום כו' והעדר אור העונג הוא בחי' העדר אור מציאותם כו' וד"ל.
He'll lose interest in being king, neglect his duties, get into other stuff, etc.


This is in general how Atik and Arich relate to each other and to the other sfiros. Now more in detail.
 וכ"ז דרך כלל אבל דרך פרט הנה רק בחי' ג"ר דע"י נחשב מבחי' העצמו' אבל ז"ת שבו מלובש בגלגלתא דא"א חסד דע"י בגלגלתא2 וגבור' במו"ס כו' וזהו המתנשא מימו"ע כו' כידוע להיות כי התהוות עיקר הרצון מן התענוג הוא רק מבחי' המדות שבתענוג
Midos of taanug: form of the taanug, which the ratzon's form will be in line with.
 כמו מן החסד שבתענוג עד"מ כאשר אדם בעונג בשמחת חתונת בנו וכה"ג אז יטיב רב חסדו לכל מצד התענוג שמרומם את נפשו (מטעם הנ"ל)
Chesed of taanug {is} taanug, gvura {is} pain. Someone who is very happy and is full of taanug, will be able to express that in many ways. {This will be explained at more length in a few lines.}
 ואז יפעלו ממנו כל רצון דהיינו להפוך גם מרצון של דין לחסד שזה תלוי בבחי' נקודת הרצון שלמעלה מטעם כמוס לרצון
Ta'am kamus: "reason": you want the ratzon to have a particular form. Here though, he'll go for just about anything.
 שמחלק לחו"ג חסד ודין כו'
A small taanug needs particular things to to nurture it into existance, but a great taanug, kana"l isn't worried about the little stuff.

Part 4
 וזהו דוגמא להבין איך שבחי' חסד דע"י מלובש בגלגלת' כו'
Liquid/chesed of atik goes into skull/kesser of arich
 ובחי' גבורה שהוא בחי' הדין בהיפך לעונג הוא מלובש בח"ס דא"א שהוא טעם כמוס לרצון
Keser - Skull: from chesed of Atik
Chochma stim'ah - Liquid as it goes through hairs [through the skull(?)] in a limited amount. {If he had a strong taanug, like the king at the wedding of his son, then there won't be a lot of limitation, but if there's very little, eg he's not in a good mood, than the liquid will be very limited, and then the krum will only be able to reveal it in a very particular desire}.
Bina - the krum, or membrane between the skull and the brain, which comes from tiferes of atik, {takes this limited taanug and does what it can with it. Eg if the guy isn't in a good mood, the krum recognizes that the limited taanug can't really become a ratzon to forgive, but maybe it's enough that he won't get back at him in a very not good way.} In the physical analogy, limits the liquid to be in particular amounts in particular places on the brain. If not for bina/krum, the chochma/liquid would go everywhere m'tzad kesser/skull.
 שזהו לדקדק ברצון שיהיה באופן זה דוקא ולא באופן אחר כו'
{So is it the krum or the hair which limits the taanug to particular places? L'chora both, chochma and bina: within the limited chochma is implied exactly what he wants, but in a way of chochma. And then through the krum hana"l, bina, this is brought out in a clear definition of exactly what he wants, with all of it's details, in a way of bina.}
 וכמ"ש בס' הקבלה שהראשוני' גזרו אומר על החכמ' שהיא בבחי' דין3 שכאשר הרצון בא עפ"י חיוב החכמ' בא בדקדוק וצמצו' כך ולא כך
Because of pain, gvura of atik, he starts being careful of what he wants, he only wants the particular things that will bring him pleasure.
 וע"כ ע"פ משפט התורה דאוריית' מח"ע4 כו' יש דינים רבים
Most of the mitzvos are prohibitions, and also the mitzvos have to be done in a very particular way.
 משא"כ הארת י"ג מדה"ר מלמעלה מחכמ' שברצון כו' שנושא עון וכו' 
Etzem taanug, could get taanug from/be expressed in anything.
ומכ"ש מבחי' ג"ר דע"י שבלתי מלובש בנאצלי'
Etzem connection to Yidden, irrespective of what we do.
 והוא בחי' העונג כמו שהוא בעצמו שעדיין לא נולד ממנו רצון כלל רק עתיד להיות ממנו כל רצון כו'

{Now there's a quick discussion of the source.}
 והוא נחשב מעצמות התענוג הפשוט הכללי שהוא מבחי' מקור כל התענוגים שבעצמו' אא"ס
{L'chora something along the lines of this: The י"ג מדה"ר or ג"ר דע"י are a very clear giluy of עצמות התענוג הפשוט הכללי, which comes from the מקור כל התענוגים שבעצמו' אא"ס.} 
 כמ"ש כי עמך מקור חיים5 מקור כל התענוגים שברצון קדום כו'
{With you, מקור כל התענוגים שבעצמו' אא"ס, is the מקור חיים. This source of life is the עצמות התענוג הפשוט הכללי. The particular level of life that it's the source of is כל התענוגים שברצון קדום.}
 ונק' עתיקא דעתיקין6 בכללות הכל כו'
{The ratzon ha'kadum was reffered to earlier as עתיקא דעתיקין.}

{Now we get back to העונג כמו שהוא בעצמו, ie ג"ר דע"י or י"ג מדה"ר, b'kitzur Atik.}
 ונק' ע"י כמ"ש בדניאל וע"י יתיב7 כו' מלשון זקנה8 שהוא בחי' נצחי' דעצמיות אא"ס
Eternal, beyond change/time, so can be expressed with anything, no matter how temporal, without changing. {L'chora many analogies for this, a first grade teacher who is a little more mature then the petty fights between his students can put his intellect into both sides of the story and figure out what happened while at the same time remaining aloof and unaffected. Whereas ione of the classmates tries to arbitrate, he might get carried away. V'rabim b'domeh.}
 כשבא ומאיר למטה בהשתלשלות דקו"ח כו'
At that point it can be called old, without end, infinite.
 אבל בעצמותו ממש מי איכא זקנה9 קמי קוב"ה כו'
How can you say that he is forever when he is totally beyond the whole concept of time and change?
 וכמ"ש במ"א בענין ועד10 בחלופי אתוון דאחד11 פשוט עצמו
Va'ed, eternal, is a permutation of one, echad. Because beyond, can go in without changing, kana"l.
 שעצמות אא"ס שלמעלה מן הזמן דימי קדם כו' כשמאיר בזמן אז הזמן ג"כ נצחי כו'
Time is made of limited lengths - seconds, months, etc. So how could that become eternal? For example: If you'll start lining up cherios one after another, it'll never be infinite. Because compared to infinity, each cherio is a zero, has no length. And no matter how many zeros you'll add up, you'll never get anywhere. You can't start with something limited and reach infinity.
Or in geometry - a point has no lenght, you can't combine them and get anywhere. But if you start with a line - that line automatically has an infinite number of points. A line is beyond the limitation of points, so it gives the points an infinite quality.
A chakira, brought down by the Tzemach Tzedek: How can limited segments of time be combined to be infinite? Either it's finite, and it has a beggining, Hashem started it. Or it's infinite, and then there must be Hashem giving the finite this infinite-ness.
That's the chakira, which argues both ways. Here the Mittler Rebbe writes how it actually is, that the infinite shines in and makes time infinite.
 ואז נק' ע"י כו'
Atik - not "yomin", "of days", pnimyus, seperate. Atik yomin - ancient of days, midos of Atik, the way that it has a connection to creation and gives it an infinite quality.
 וד"ל:
