Chapter 11


Part 1
(יא) והנמשל מכל הנ"ל בנפש יובן למשכיל
to someone who is able to find the abstract point of chochma
 למעלה בעצמות אא"ס שלפני הצמצום שנק' יחיד וכלול גם שם מע"ס ונק' ע"ס הגנוזות בהעלם העצמות ממש
usually hidden in A"K, here though b'helem ha'atzmus mamesh
 כמו בחי' חפץ חסד שכלול בבחי' עצמיות דאא"ס שמחמתו וסיבתו
because of it and resulting from it
 היה הרצון הפשוט לכל ההשתלשלות שזהו בדבר פרט כמ"ש בע"ח בהקדמ' כשעלה ברצונו2 הפשוט כו' ובודאי סיבת עליי' הרצון הפשוט בעצמותו היינו רק כי חפץ חסד הוא בעצמו ע"כ עלה ברצונו להטיב חסדו להיות מקור למקור להשתלשלות דקו"ח כו'
Explains in Tanya that chessed above is ability to create and enliven to no end, and this is our source. חפץ חסד הוא - he is (also) a creator, and our whole hishtalshelus is a revelation of this .
 וה"ז ע"ד דוגמא כשמחמת עצמיות המדה דחפץ חסד הכלולה בבחי' יחידה כנ"ל עולה ברצונו לעשו' טוב וחסד בדבר פרט כנ"ל שבא בגלוי מן העלמו ההיולי דחפץ חסד לכלול כל מה שיעלה בפרט ברצונו להטיב הכל בא מחמתו וכחו כו'
Every kind act comes from being kind, similarly everything is a giluy of ה's ability to create - thats how stuff comes from simplicity. This is what ch 10-11 are answering, how can all these details have a mukor/a part in עאא"ס, the giluy exactly as is? Because ה is also a creator, and part of understanding that is understanding all the creation, and part of his being that is that he has a knowledge (kana"l) of everything that he could do.
 וכמו שבגלוי רצון שבא מחמת חפץ חסד זה כלול מי' חב"ד ומדות כו' מזה מוכרח שגם בבחי' חפץ חסד ההיולי שכלול בעצמות ממש כלול מי' חכמה ומדות כו' 
Part of human soul is this thing of kindness, part of soul revealing itself is in kindeness, and part of that is that it has to be with sechel etc, and he can reveal all of these in a way of chesed. All these parts came from his heyuli for kindness, so they were all over there also in the etzem.
רק שלא יתכן בהם לומר גם ענין ההתכללות והאחדות אחר שכלול בעצמות בבחי' היולי עדיין כו'
Essence higher then everything, goes into anything. Higher then details and explanation, which is why only a person{/soul} can be kind. Can't make a list of pratim, put it into a computer and say that if you have this, your kind. But when you have this point of chesed, you have all these pratim. So even though we say the heyuli chesed has everything, but its only chesed and nothing else, you don't see these other things at all.


Part 2
 וכמ"כ במדה זולתה כמו מדת הגבו' או הנצח והת"ת וכה"ג
gevura: that he can conceal, limit his light
netzach: giluy even in (the face of) helem
tiferes: putting together diffrent colors, ה's ability to unite opposites, e.g. soul in body or higher then nature in nature.
 הכל הוא כלול בעצמיות דאא"ס שנק' טה"ע
purity, that nothing else. Like pure olive oil. Upper purity is that there is nothing except for ה. Lower is stuff, but reveals him.
 והוא שנק' יחיד שלמעלה מאחד פשוט כו'
At this point there is only ה, he automatically has everything. Not that you see any sort of existence of sefiros etc, just ה, but of course being ה means that he do all this {like how being kind means can do all these pratim of kindness}
 עד בחי' מדת המלוכה בעצמות אא"ס שנק' מל' דא"ס גם הוא כלול בבחי' היולי העצמי דעצמות אא"ס
why is this emphasized? Because malchus is mainly from others, that others exalt serve etc. Might think not there, because it relates to something seperate. Nope, he can also have this thing of pleasure from something seperate, that e.g. he told you to put on Tfilin and you did it.
 שהוא בבחי' א"ס ממש וכמו שחפץ חסד בבחי' א"ס ממש בעצמות או לחכמתו א"ס כך מדת ההתנשאות שכלול בעצמות אא"ס הוא בבחי' א"ס
not only care, rather to care infinitely, even the smallest point - this kosher, that not. Yes, its really nothing - but if he decides to care, no one can care like he can. Like Tfillin - one drop missing from one letter - whole thing is posul.
Hashem has all the sfira, but we emphasize chessed and malchus. Chessed is the practical start of world, but the pnimyus was malchus, ה wanted to be king. These are the main sfiros in relation to the world.
 וכלול מי' בהעלם העצמות שהוא בחי' הרצון והתענוג וחכמה ומדות שבמדות המלוכה
Included in essential kingship is knows how everything else needs to be for that. Just like chesed - being kind means has essence  of kindness, he automatically knows how this goes into all the other stuff.

Part 3
One example of malchus is the concept that really every mitzva is a חוק, otherwise you're not doing it because ה wants you to, rather because it makes sense {and then it doesn't express malchus}.
 אך ענין אנא אמלוך שעלה ברצונו ומח' הפשוט היינו כשבא בדבר פרט לבחי' ההשתלשלות בגלוי מהעלמו ההיולי
Ana emloch lower, not just that of course ה could reveal himself in a thing of malchus, rather next level, arose in desire for particular thing.
כנ"ל במדה דחפץ חסד באדם למטה וכנ"ל במשל י' כחות הכלולים שבבחי' יחידה בבחי' היולי ועצמיות כו' שאינן נבדלין מן העצם כלל וכמו כח התנוע' שכלול בעצם החי וכהתפשטו' החיות ההיולי הכלול בעצם הנפש ממש כנ"ל
In all those mesholim we explained a certain point where you can't talk about any division. So to yachid, this first level of אא"ס is giluy exactly as is, that he trancends all limitations and divisions, and automatically can come into anything.
 ולמטה מזה הוא בחי' אא"ס המאיר ומתפשט
This is something that can be revealed.
Explained in Basi Legani that למעלה מעלה עד אין קץ and למטה מטה עד אין תכלית are two levels in אא"ס itself. Lemayla is like yachid, the essence of the light that is not revealable {it is not revealed, but revelations come from it, כנ"ל}, because it trancends expression. Lemata is the other two, that already have a shaychus to coming down.
Idea of ספירות עד אין קץ, that Hashem can make infinite sefiros, or stuff that isn't sefiros, diffrent ways to reveal himself. Over here coming out as a sefira {caveat - see next phrase}{whereas before it's just him, who automatically could have these things but they don't really exist over there at all, כנ"ל}, which can be revealed. The idea of chesed is not ה {as we said earlier, he is not kindness etc}, it is something seperate, so it could be revealed. משא"כ the essence of chessed is Him כנ"ל. "To know ה, (you need) to be" - either him and know, or not and don't. That essence can't be known, but what its me'ir etc you can know it without being him.
והכל עדיין בבחי' עצמותו לפני הצמצום
that even before tzimtzum, part of Hashem's knowing himself is that he knows all these sefiros and how he could reveal them if he would make a tzimtzum etc. Like moshul of teacher - he knows it in a way higher then students understanding, and he also knows how to explain it.
 וזהו הנק' אחדות הפשוטה שיתכן שם בחי' התכללות ואחדות בע"ס
At this point, aware of sefiros, and that Hashem is a greater which has all of them. Not just kindess etc, he has all. 
Really, have to realize that he is something higher, which is the idea of yachid. But here recogize that he has every ability. And that does not define Hashem - to say "what is Hashem? Someone who has every ability etc" - that doesn't do it. Could say based on that that like some magic wand that has every ability. This is what we say that it's מאיר ומתפשט, we aren't discussing the etzem anymore (kind of), rather giluyim from it, and at that point, no matter how much giluyim there are and how well you comprehend them, you can't through that reach a comprehension of etzem,  this inyan of echad is the best you can get.
 וגם הם נק' ע"ס בלי מ"ה1
In addition to there all being there and there all being included and part of one thing, and there all being needed {missing one means not talking about ה}- they don't have a distinct existance or nature
 כי הוא למעלה גם מבחי' הכנה להשפעה למטה בגלוי עדיין
In moshul of chesed - someone wants to reveal there essential faculty of chessed, as it is in yachid, but doesn't know how yet. Its bli mah - doesn't know what he wants. At this point, where before כלים, no definition, can't really differentiate between chesed and gevura. {If they have no definition, they could be anything.} Diffrent things, but not in a way of a "known wisdom" etc.
 רק שמוכן לצאת מההיולי בדבר פרט
but didn't yet come out in a particular way, so could still come out in any way.
 כמו חפץ חסד ההיולי הנ"ל כשבא לענין הרצון וחפץ חסד בהשתלשלות דקו כו'
At this 2nd stage, it is planned for this desire for kindness - וכאמור לעיל that in the nimshal this is like the power to create - to be revealed, to make a hishtalshelus. At this point, there is already a recognition of prutim, that there will be seperate things- this is the whole idea of creation, seperate. {but it's still bli ma"h}
Yachid - of course Hashem can also create. Echad - Hashem's ability to create is a giluy of Hashem's also being a creator {yachid}. But that recognizes something seperate, showing power to create, not the creator. So even before this power to create was revealed, its concept is already recognized with all of its details, but still כלול {before the tzimtzum} because thats part of גלוי of himself, knowing that he could create.


Part 4
{[tikkun(part of transcript/notes)]:Actually - not recognizing creations, rather the power to create. {I think I implemented this tikkun fully and correctly with the above, see there and compare to recording} }
To apreciate what means "creator" (yachid) have to recognize the power to create (echad), and lastly the creations (kadmon) which will be discussed in a minute.
 גם שלא יצא עדיין בגלוי גמור גם בעצמו
Not yet measured to come out in a particular way. Its not a time thing, {the only diffrence between this and kadmon being that it wasn't yet measured}, rather {its a qualatative diffrence} we're talking about the power of chesed, which could be revealed in any way, any sefiros, any hishtalshilus. We don't mean chesed as here, rather as there, ענין of למטה מטה, spreading out.
 עכ"פ 
even though it doesn't have a defined existence
שם יתכן בחינת אחדות והתכללות
{I think of sfiros, not davka the sfiros of the sfiros} becuase your talking about something seperate {so you can talk about different sfiros being united at that level}
 רק שנק' אחדות הפשוטה בהיותו עדיין באור עצמותו הפשוט בתכלית
Even though we're talking about how he is revealed in sefiros, which is already a light that is מאיר and מתפשט, but Hashem has sefiros עד אין קץ, and its totally simple, just that there could be parts, but because they could be divided in infinite ways, there are no inherent divisions.
 וכמו בחי' התחלקו' שכל ומדו' כו' שבחפץ חסד זה
{yachid}
 שמחמתו הוא שעלה ברצונו וחכמתו להטיב כו'
{echad}
 גם טרם בואו לגלוי כלל וכלל כו'
{kadmon}
that with decision to have a giluy, its recognized that there will be a giluy outside and made up of parts. At that point there's no estimation, so it's completely simple, but it's recognized that eventually it will be made up of parts.
 וכנ"ל במדריג' הב' בנפש האדם.
And that concludes echad.
{kitzur: all the abilities, these different powers ready to be revealed, vs yachid, just-there, of course, but not recognized וד"ל}

והג' כאשר מבחי' חפץ חסד זה הוא שעלה כבר ברצון ושכל כו'
came up as an actuall desire to do the chesed (first two levels)
 והוכן בכל השיעור באותיות ששיער בעצמו
(Kadmon) letters - any sort of limited expression
איך יהיה איכות אופן ההשפע' ממש לחוץ מעצמותו ע"ד דוגמ' מכח התנוע' המוכן איך להניע וכח החיות המוכן איך להחיות
already in the physical eye, prepared to see physical colors - but didn't actually see anything yet {ולהעיר, in the nimshol didn't become melubosh in the world yet, ענין to understand from the moshol is that the is a preperation, but not revealed yet. Yes, there is a preperation in a particular way- but for every possible sight.}
 כשמוכנים כבר בשיעור ואופן מוגבל כנ"ל בענין מדריגה הג' בנפש
At this point everything is ready and measured- only thing lacking is to actually do it
ולמעלה היינו מה ששיער בעצמו' אא"ס שנק' טה"ע באופן ושיעור מה שרוצ' בהשתלשלות בפועל התגלות דקו עד סוף עולם העשי'
to the hairs on your head - he knew how many, how they would curve - everything was measured
 שזהו מ"ש גליף גליפו בטה"ע כנ"ל
Not only does he know he can create, what that power is like and how it includes within itself other powers, and sefiros without end - he also knows every creation he can make, and chooses which one he's going to do
 והוא הנק' בחי' קדמון דהיינו מה שקדם אופן הרצון להשפיע טרם שמשפיע עדיין בגלוי ממש וזהו עדיין לפני הצמצום הראשון הנק' מק"פ וחלל כו' כנ"ל וד"ל.
1)Beyond everything - yachid
2)has everything all powers and abilities and 
3) everything even down in this physical world reveals the etzem in a unique way {application of power?}
So all this is a giluy of Hashem, that to appreciate who he is you have to see these three things.
This is in the אא"ס. In א"ס, a יכולת, not actually there. But in אור - kadmond mamesh has everything that we find in creation, just that over there you don't see it as an e.g. apple rather as a giluy of Hashem. Tzimtzum hides everything except for the e.g. apple.


Part 5
Finished nimshal for the three levels, now flows to giluy after, intro to next chapter, and showing how everything after tzimtzum connects to before
ומדריג' הד' הוא מה שאחר הצמצום הנ"ל נשאר בחי' הרשימו
this reshimu is the 4th level. We don't count the tzimtzum as the 4th because its not a giluy, process that the אור undergoes.
 ונמשך ממנו הקו שהוא בכללות בחי' טה"ת בחי' מקיף כללי לכל השתלשלות דקו כו'
Purity - Upper is giluy of self to self, nothing else. Lower - giluy, but relating to something seperate, seen as something seperate. 
At this point there isn't even a mikabel - upper like how light is included in its source, lower - already came out, but still just a giluy of source. Later theres diffrent inyanim, and then you can't see the source.
makif haklali - the general point of this whole business is to reveal Hashem. The way Hashem reveals himself in this hishtalshelus is through the טהירה תתאה, or makif hakloli, here defined as the kav and reshimu.
The essential giluy, which encompasses all hishyalsheluyos and stuff, is the upper purity.
 שזהו הבא בבחי' השפעה למטה מן העצמות כמשל חיות המתפשט בגלוי להחיו' כו' וככח התנועה שמתפqשט' להניע הנפעל בגלוי כו' שמשתנ' ממהות רוחני למהות הגשמה כנ"ל וכמו צמיחה גשמי' מצמיחה רוחני' כך הוא ערך האור שאחר הצמצום לגבי האור העצמי שלפני הצמצום דמשום זה הוצרך להיות ענין הצמצום הזה רק בשביל שיוכל להיות הארת האור שבקו שבא בשביל מקור לאבי"ע כידוע אך עכ"ז הרי כל פרטי הע"ס דאבי"ע הכל כלולים מתחלה בעצמות אא"ס בבחי' היולי ועצמי
And this is his main intention in mentioning the fourth level here, to say that all this stuff was originally included in עצמות אא"ס
 ואח"כ ע"י הצמצום משתנה לפי אופן מוגבל בהשפעה הכללי' דקו בבחי' סובב וה"ז כדוגמת חיות הנפש הרוחני' כשבאה להחיו' הגוף שכלול' ברוחניות מכל פרטי חיות הגשמיו' ראי' ושמיעה שבגוף הגשמי כנ"ל
even before the soul came into body, had all the sences and sensations that has when its in body. Then certain things happening in the body are linked to certain perceptions in the soul - but its all coming from the soul. Perception is not physical, it's the way the soul reacts to the external stimulus. The soul already has all the particular perceptions, the body just triggers/brings out a particular.
Like moshul of diffrent colors - really the white light shining into it already had the color before it went through, the glass just holds back all the other parts of the light except for the e.g. red, etc. Also soul - its self awareness includes all these diffrent perceptions, and the body just hides certain perceptions and so the soul is focused on a particular aspect of itself. The body just triggers which tzimtzum should happen, but its all from the soul.
Which is why we bring this down here, even though seemingly this chapter is talking about עצמות אא"ס, so whats this fourth level doing here - because this fourth level is still עצמות אא"ס. From our view it looks like something seperate, but really giluy after tzimtzum is just a giluy of what was before, its still mamesh a giluy of Hashem.
 (וענין הצמצום והרשימה יתבאר בסמוך)
Addendum: The present that you give your friend doesn't come from your heyuli for kindness, only the desire. But in the moshul of the soul enlivining the body, the actual perceptions come from the soul.

Part 6
Now for some perush hamilos of Baruch Sha'amar.
 (וזהו פירוש כללי למ"ש ברוך שאמר והיה העולם2 פירוש שאמר בהעלם ברצונו הפשוט שבמל' דאין סוף בהיותו עדיין כלול בחפץ חסד העצמי הנ"ל
Yachid
 ואח"כ והי' בגלוי אור המתפשט לדבר פרט להשתלשלו'
Vi'haya - its coming out to something. We don't know what yet, but its coming out to a particular thing.
 להיות מקור לכל העולמות
Echad
 ופי' והיה העולם היינו דווקא מן מה ששיער בעצמו בכח
The details of what would come out, Ha'olem, is kadmon
 שהוא שרש מה שמתהוו' אח"כ העול' הכללי שנמשך מן הקו וכו' וכנ"ל 
Simple meaning of these words: its one title of Hashem himself, that these ideas of "who 'said' and 'the world' 'came into being'" are all reffering to עאא"ס. Then we break it up into three stages. 
1)"That said" - he can say whatever he wants, this is a complete heyuli.
2)"V'hayah" - and something came to be, but the details aren't there yet
3)"Ha'olem" - the exact details came up.
But over here speaking how 2 and 3 {aren't revealed like after tzimtzum rather} are part of {giluy} of 1, {not seen as seperate}.
וד"ל.
And that concludes the perush hamilos for what we've covered so far, and now he goes a bit farther.
 וברוך הוא נסתר היינו בחי' קדמונו של עולם3
But now how the estimation {kadmon} is found in the reshimo, with the fact that this is just a giluy of Hashem concealed, like letters without the light, as will be explained later regarding the tzimtzum.
 דהיינו מה ששיער בעצמו בכח כו' וכמ"ש מגיד מראשית אחרית4 מראשית הקו עד סופו כו' ומקדם אשר לא נעשה5 עדיין היינו מקדמונו של עולם הנ"ל ונק' ימי קדם6 שקודם למה שנמשך בקו והוא מה שקדם בעצמו בכח מה שעתיד להיות בפועל כו'
this estimation is what was put into the reshimu, כנ"ל
 וד"ל. ומ"ש ברוך אומר ועושה כו' היינו מה שנמשך בקו בפו"מ
This second 'saying' is as it is brought out, the first circle of the kav, which willl be explained later, the רצון הקדום
 ועושה בראשית כו' הוא כל שיעור קומת א"ק כו' וגוזר ומקיים בתחלה
"Boruch omer" "Boruch gozer" "Boruch oseh"
 הוא בחי' קו המדה שלפני א"ק
which measures out that the iggulim should come out in a particular way, ten, then to yosher/ak
 שהוא בחי' צמצום דרשימו שנמשך ממנו הקו כידוע
‎This refers to how the kav hamidah draws according to what estimated in reshimu
 וכמשי"ת בעז"ה בסמוך):

