Chapter 22

Part 1
(כב) ומעתה
that we've explained everything from before tzimtzum, to how there's a split into three lines from chitzonyus hakeser
 יש להבין בפרטי התכללות15 דע"ס דאצי' 
Chesed of gvura etc, chesed of malchus of chochma of malchus of chesed
ותחלה יש לבאר ענין פרטי התחלקות הספי' לי' וי' לי' כו' כמו חסד שבחכמה שנחלק גם הוא לי' וכה"ג גבור' שבחכמה נחלק לי' כו'.
Ten sfiros, then you could divide those ten into ten. Really, you could go forever, each of those 100 into ten, etc, but usually we only count two levels, for two kinds of hiskalelus which will be explained. Also connects to chapter 20. Just counting the sfira itself, chesed, gvura, etc - an inyan of nekuda. 10 - like sfira. 100 - partzuf. B'chlall that's how it is in kabala.
First we'll show how the sfiros {include other sfiros}, than how that connects to two very different types of hiskallelus.
 כי הנה החכמ' כלולה מי' היינו כמו חו"ג שבחכמה להטו' כלפי זכו' או כלפי חוב
An intellectual feeling towards innocence or guilt. You ask someone for advice, and he says that he has a bad feeling about it. He can't explain why, its in chochma. Or a judge might have a feeling. {This shouldn't be confused with "letting your emotions mix in." Here is an intellect, that you just can't bring into words. V'ayn kahn m'komo. See the first two chatpers.}
 וחסד שבחכמה להטות כלפי זכות גם הוא כלול מי'
Even chesed of chochma, for example haveing a feeling that the guy is innocent, has ten sfiros.
 דהיינו כמו חו"ג שבו
In chesed of chochma.
 לזכות באופן כך וכך ולחוב יחייב גם הוא באופן כך וכך
That guy is innocent, but he isn't the greatest guy ever. That's a gvura in chesed of chochma. Vs not only innocent, but he's a great guy, and we'll also give him a reward. That would be like a chesed of chesed of chochma.
 (הגם שהזכות יהפך לחוב בדין שבחכמה והחוב יהפך לזכות בחסד שבחכמה 
But l'chora whatever chesed will bring as a reason for chesed, gvura will say is a reason for gvura. Like we said in the previous chapter about da'as noteh. For example the defense for a murderer will say that he was under bad influences growing up, childhood trauma, etc. Gvura: that's true- so he's totally bad from the start, there's no hope, throw the book at him! Similarly, any svara for bad should be turned to good in chesed etc.
So how can we say that chesed of chochma will limit itself according to gvura - any svara that gvura says to limit, chesed should turn into a reason to give more!
זהו
This kind of turning around a svara is
 כאשר הוא בעצם בלתי התחלקות אבל בהתחלקות יוכל להיות גם בחסד שבחכמ' בחי' דין ובדין שבחכמה בחי' חסד כידוע)
So nekuda has this difference from sfira. Even though in nekuda there's technicaly a hischalkus, but not really, because everything is made to fit with it. In the etzem mida, there's no compromise. This is what you want, and this is what you have to get. But once you get into {even sfira, which is already concerned with} the means to the end {like we said earlier that it'll have an actual svara, just that it's biased, and only works to implement the desire, not to form it}, outside of the etzem desire, there could be limitation. For example if someone is bribed he has an etzem mida to make they guy innocent. But it's not important to him weahter the guy looks like a tzadik or not after the whole court case is finished. He was only paid to make him innocent. Anything past that is not noge'a to his etzem, and at that point there could be an actuall mixing of svoras. "Innocent, but-". {So lichora the bias towards innocence would be an inyan of nekuda. But than there's the means to the end, when that etzem desire spreads out. It's tohu over there also- the guy is definititely innocent - but there could be an actual limitation for secondary implementation details. V'adayan TzI"K.}
 וכן במדות דחו"ג עצמן
As they are themselves, not how they're nichlall in chochma.
 החסד נחלק לי' כח"ב ומדו' כו' דגם שאין מרחמין בדין16
You aren't allowed to have mercy when your a judge {an inyan of gvura having chesed}, you have to give the law.
 היינו בדין העצמי
{In that level of din, you see what he did and what the book says, and there's no room for leniancy. See siddur im da"ch "ani b'tzedek echeza punecha" in its beggining.} But in the hispashtus, the opposite can mix in. So true, even in the hispashtus the judge can't say, "well, he's crying, so I'll be nice." But chesed could have a say, for example to have reasons not to give the most serious punishment. "First time offense", etc.
 וכן אין דין בחסד העצמי אבל בהתפשטותן מן העצם יש חסד בדין ודין בחסד כנ"ל:


Part 2
והנה יש התכללות שנק' ביטול דבר בהיפוכו המנגדו והיה כמוהו ממש וכמו מיתוק הגבורות בחסדים כמו שהמקטרג יהפך לסניגור וכן להיפך שהסניגור יהפך למקטרג וכמיתוק מים המרים במתוקים 
Adding sugar to choclate or coffee
או להיפך וכן ביטול שכל לזכות בשכל לחוב וכה"ג ה"ז התכללו' אמיתי והיינו רק לפי שיש כח זה במנגד עצמו
[7:09]The choclate can be sweetened by sugar, the prosecutar can become a defender, becuase he has that quality within him also. If someone is really against something, it could be a sign that he knows he relates to that thing, and he has to fight extra hard to make sure that that thing is not revealed within himself. But if someone doesn't relate to that other thing, than he doesn't feel threantened, so he won't feel so much like he has to fight it. {This shows how the opposotion could be turned to support, because this itself that he's opposing is a sign that he has a connection to what he's opposing, otherwise he wouldn't have to attack it.}
Someone who never sinned: I would want it, but Hashem told me not to.
Baal Tshuva: Should not say that. Because he tasted it, he has to fight it extra, to say "I don't want it." Because - he does. {My battery lasted exactly long enough that's pretty cool. Now off to the shiur of Rabbi Korf.}


Part 3
 וא"ל17 לא היה בטל בו כמו במתיקות יש מרירות בהעלם ובמרירות יש מתיקות בהעלם כמשל ודמיון מבישול המרקחת18 מדבש וצנון שנעשה טעם עריבות כולל מחריפות ומתיקות יחד כידוע
That brings out the sweetness in the radishes, and the bitterness in the honey, and it's really yummy. But too much of one will over power the main taste of the other.
 וכן יש מטבע האש במים וממים באש
Physical fire/water isn't pure, a mixture
 ע"כ יתכלל אש במים או מים באש
Like lightning from clouds.
 כמ"ש הוציא מים מאש19 ואש ממים כו'
Flame sticks together, a quality of water. And if you burn hydrogen, it makes water. At the Challenger tragady, the explosion made water. Water is wet and cold. Fire {has qualities of water, it's} "wet", sticks together, and cold, its heat is limited, it could be hotter. And water has a warmth, it's not frozen, and it's "dry", yes it sticks together, but not tottally.
 וכך במדות חו"ג מפני שיש דין בחסד וחסד בדין כנ"ל
The chesed has a limit. Being nice, but only to a point. And {even within that inyan of being nice, } din could be needed in order to keep good safe. Also din: why punish? To help society, keep everyone safe. chesed.
 ע"כ יבוטל הדין בחסד או להיפוך החסד בדין
If being nice would hurt, so be strict. Bitul of chesed in din. And same with opposite. Or someone is nice to you, but than does a lot of bad things, the chesed becomes over powered by the din.
 וא"ל לא היה מתכלל דבר בהיפוכו לעולם
So far two types of hiskalellus have been discussed: either it could be taken over by the other, or limited by it.
Etzem mida, nekuda, the opposite is taken over. A reason for guilt becomes a reason for innocence. 
Hispashtus from that etzem, sfira: Chesed has different stuff going on, it has a chesed and gvura - but everything is still really chesed. A limitation on the chesed, but still chesed.
Now a third type, when oros come into kelim, where a light of {only} chesed could be in keli of {unweakened} gvura.


Part 4
Sfiras ha'omer: all sfiras of bina. First division is in the light.
{?Division in the light? I don't think that was discusssed. Maybe (hergesh alert. skip to end of brackets) the first division of the sfira, eg gvura of chesed, even though it's the light in a vessel, is considered to just be bringing out different elements of the light, that the light of chesed could be expressed in gvura. And it could also be expressed in chesed. And when it's in gvura, maybe the gvura element of the light will weaken the chesed, to the point where gvura of chesed will be an actual din, or maybe the gvura will be totally blown away by the chesed. (As per the two types of hiskalellus explained so far.) Now we get into how these "forms" of the light express themselves in a vessel, even in an opposite vessel, and how when that happens there's no limitation either on the light or the vessel.}
{To bring a physical analogy of questionable applicability to this topic, a prism seperates different elements of the light, than you can shine that light onto paper of any color.}
Each week is one mida of the light of bina. The days are that light going into a vessel. So chesed of gvura {that we mention when we count the omer for that day} is the light of gvura {of bina} going into the vessel of chesed. etc. Now we get to that days level.
{Or it could be, as we see clearly in this chapter, that there are subtly different ways of explaining e.g. chesed of gvura. You could say the leaning chesed has towards gvura, a limitation, or chesed overpowers the gvura and turns it into a chesed, or the gvura stays gvura and gives greater strength to the chesed. So in regards to sfiras ha'omer, there's another way: the first division is a division within the light itself, and the second division is the light going into vessels. That division of the light would l'chora be the limitation or overpowering spoken of earlier, where the light "changes". In this chapter we don't call it with that name. It could be that here we would say that that happens within the vessels, or it could be here also he means the light, or (probably) it's within the vessel, but through the vessel the light changes, so we could also say that it's within the light. And b'pashtus, the whole form comes from the vessel, chesed is the name of the vessel, not the light. v'kan m'komo, v'od yesh l'va'er et zeh ktzat. Ul'a'ir that this will be spoken of more at length in chapters 27-31.}
 אמנם הנה יש התכללות מדין בחסד מפני שהוא כמוהו בעצם ולא שהוא בטל ממהותו אדרבה נותן בו תוקף ועוז ועכ"ז נק' גבור' שבחסד וכן להיפוך חסד שבגבורה שנותן כח בגבורה ודין כו'
Before, compromise. If you mix sugar and coco - hot chocalate is sweet, but not as sweet as sugar. There's a compromise, the sweentess is limited. Here, there is no limiting, and adiraba.
 והענין הוא כידוע ע"ד אם רעב שונאך האכילהו לחם כי גחלים20 כו' 
pshat: it kills someone to get help from his enemy. deeper: yetzar hara: if its hungry, wants to be bigger, a yesh, feed it bread, torah, "We'll make you a big rabbi, a big chasidus guy" - he thinks it'll make it bigger, but really it tottally destroys the yetzar hora, tshuva. Or {another example of gvura of chesed} a spy: he's friendly with the enemy, but that chesed is the biggest gvura. Nothing causes more hurt than to become really freindly with someone, get to know all of their secerets - and than stab them in the back.
Light of gvura in keli of chesed. {R.W says opposite, l'chora mistake.}
An Iranain (?) said that the way it works there is that if someone is going to fire someone you really hate, first he'd give him a raise, and tell him how he's so important to the company etc, and than once he has it in his head that he deserves so much money, he's told that he's awesome, but the company can't afford him, so - he'll have to ge let go. Than, for the rest of his life, he isn't happy with what he's getting, he feels like he should get more. So - the chesed totally ruins him.
הרי בחסד וטוב זה עושה לו רעה ודין גמור לאבד נפשו
Also, if your mean to someone who's mean to you, less of a punishment for him. He was mean and you were mean. But if your nice in return - he has a bigger problem.
 וכן משלם לשונאיו כדי להאבידו21
Reward to wicked in this world: seems like chesed, really ultimate din, to not give them anything in the world to come. They'll have more oppritunity to do bad, to the point where they can't be fixed.
If you didn't care about someone, so you wouldn't bother rebuking them, just give them whatever they want, and they'll just sink lower and lower.
 וכה"ג כל בחי' דין ועונש שנעשה בבחי' חסד הרי הוא עוז ותוקף הדין ביותר ונק' חסד שבגבור'
Before: chesed of gvura was, "Ok, I don't like him, but only to a point." The hatred is limited. Here, the chesed gives even more strenght to the gvura.
 וכמו והשמיע ה' את הוד קולו22 במחנה סנחרב
Killed them all with a great giluy. And Havaya, chesed! Biggest din, they're whole thing was against Hashem, Hashem showed how he's the only true existance, and that totally destroyed them.


Part 5
 וכן להיפוך בבחי' גבורה שבחסד שהמעשה של חסד עשוי במדת הדין להיות בו יותר תוקף ועוז כמו גבורות גשמים23 שבאים בצמצום כדי שיומשך בריבוי וכמו צמצום אור השפע בכל מקום כדי שיתקבל
The more the teacher limits the sechel to the level of the student, the bigger chesed.
 וכן התחלקות ע"ב גשרים24 כו'
72 bridges. Bridge across big river: a lot of small bridges attached together, {^^^(except without the empty space)} resting on the water, each with their own support beams. Why? That way unstead of dealing with the full force of the river, each "mini bridge" only works on a small portion. Light of chesed in vessel of gvura, {The water is divided, weaker, in order that the bridge is able to handle it, that the mekabel is able to recieve.}
 וכן יסורים של אהבה25
Like if your strict with someone because you know they could do a lot better, hard times to bring out a deep inner strength.
 וכאב את בן ירצה26 מייסרו
A father who desires his son rebukes him.
 שהחסד נעשה בלבוש דמה"ד דוקא
Taking a knife from a kid, a doctor with harsh cures - any kind of "tough love".
 וה"ז דוקא תוקף החסד יותר מעצם החסד
It's easy to give people stuff. That could be a lesser love, that you want people to know that you're kind. A true love is that even though you know that this is going to make you unpopular, because you know that this is what the other guy needs, you'll berate him or whatever.
 וכמו הקדים רפואה למכה27
Because the cure is what he really wants, because he loves us.
 וכמ"ש כי הוא יך וירפאנו28 ולכאורה למה צריך להכאה כלל
if the whole thing was just to fix it? Keep it fixed!
 אך ע"י הרפואה יברא ויתחזק יותר
"Any thing which doesn't kill someone makes him stronger."
 כי החולה הוא בחי' הדין הקשה ויעובר ע"י מדה"ד שבחסד שהוא הרפואה מדברים קשים כו'
Things which are dangerous to a healthy person, surgeries or different treatements.
 וכה"ג בכל מיתוק הדין בשרשו דוקא היינו בדין שבחסד דוקא להיותו תוקפו של חסד לגבור על הדין ולהמתיקו כו' וד"ל.
Bad is for us to over power. Game: If someone is playing basketball against you, it's harder, but then its a bigger taanug when you get the ball in the hoop. A bigger chesed, which comes from gvura, gvura of chesed, the strong giluy of chesed.
Our world: gvura of chesed. We're second shmita of first yovel. The first yovel is chesed, the first shmita was chesed of chesed, tohu, now we're in gvura of chesed, tikkun. That's why the world is kind of interesting at times.
Zos chukas hatorah: To make one guy pure, need to make another person impure: Why? Why do you need a descent to ascend? Answer: Zos chukas hatorah, the one law which is beyond our intellect, that's what Hashem decided


Part 6
 ובכ"ז יובן איכות אופני פרטי ההתכללות דחו"ג
DIvisions in the light, {See my explanation (with a hergesh alert) at the beginning of part 4} and different lights in the vessels. Than you can even have
 כמו גם גבורה שבחסד עם חסד שבגבורה
The strictness of the parent with the kindness of the spy, ultimate love coming together with ultimate gvura.
 דגם שהן ב' הפכים ביותר שזה תוקף החסד וזה תוקף הגבורה ומכ"ש מצד התפשטות לבושי' מחולפים שזה פועל דין וזה פועל חסד אבל מ"מ מצד שכ"א פועל בשביל דבר היפוכו דוקא שגבורה שבחסד פעולתו דין ופנימיותו חסד וחסד שבגבורה פעולתו חסד ופנימיותו דין ע"כ יוכלו לבוא כא' דוקא מפני שכ"א מראה ב' הפכים עכ"פ
How could both be together?
Teacher limits idea for student:  students see a chesed, they're getting taught, but that comes from a gvura, that he's simplifying his deep understanding. {So chesed of gvura? Tz"I. Could be that they see a big gvura, a gvura being expressed with chesed. They have an understanding, but it's a "teaser", they can see that there's a lot more that they're not getting, that this chesed is coming from a gvura. So the small sechel they get drives home their low level and makes them want to grow.} But to the teacher the sechel that he's giving them is a gvura. To the students it's a giluy, albeit a giluy which comes from gvura. But to the teacher it's b'chlall not a giluy, it's a small silly thing. It's a gvura which comes from chesed, his deep love for his studends, and his desire that they should grow in learning.
Spy: A chesed of gvura, his kindness to the enemy is actually a big din on them. But at the same time it's a gvura of chesed, that because of his love for his country he'll go and hang out with the enemy and hide his patriotic feelings.
What's a chesed for one will always be a gvura for the other, the two always come together. Like when your facing someone: What they see as being their right hand (chesed) you see as being left (gvura).
 וכמו גבריאל שהציל לאברהם29
Gavriel: gvura, and he saved Avrohom. But s'shtayt that Michoel {chesed} said "Let me do it, I'll put out the fire", and Gavriel wanted to {"Let fire come and put out the fire. That would be cool."} Hashem said no, I'll do it myself. But because Gavriel wanted to, he got to save m'choel chananya and azaryah. And here we say Gavriel saved Avrohom! Maybe it was still done by Gavriel, but because it was with opposites, it was like Hashem did it himself. Avrohom was in the fire, Hashem made it hotter, killed the guys who chucked him in, but at the same time to Avrohom it was cool.
 וכן צינן את הגחלים30
Gavriel sent to wipe out (Yerushalayim?) he cooled the coals in order to lessen the destruction. {Both of these are examples of gvura of chesed.}
 ה"ז מבחי' גבורה שבחסד כמו זיעה טובה מוציא את חולי החום
Sometimes when someone has a fever, it's good to make them hotter, they'll sweat it out.
 וכרפואה למכה כו'
A harsh treatment.
 והוא המכה במחנה סנחרב בבחי' חסד שבגבור' כמ"ש ויצא מלאך ה'31 כו' וכידוע וד"ל
{Chesed of gvura.} To sancheiriv it was externally a chesed, a great giluy, but the Jews saw it as a strict judgement on their enemies. So it's not one Malach doing two things, chesed and gvura, saving and destroying, because takeh it's a chesed but it's also a gvura. {So we see two ultimate opposites, chesed of gvura and gvura of chesed, in the same place, in one malach. VTzI"K, different times.}
 והיינו לאכללא שמאלא בימינא32 וימינא בשמאלא שהוא כמו אור החסד בכלי הגבורה שפועל הכלי היפך האור שלו שכלי הגבורה פועל דין היפוך אור של חסד שבו וכן להיפוך כלי החסד פועל חסד היפוך אור הגבורה שבו ואין זה היפך כלל מאחר שהוא בבחי' אור וכלי
The inyan of chesed doesn't mind using gvura, as long as what ends up being done is a chesed. What different does the vehicle make?
 שהוא כענין חומר וצורה (כמשי"ת)
Draw the word "r-e-d" with a green pen. Is it red or green? Both, and it's not a contradiction: The form is green, but the substance is red. And you can take a vessel of gvura and use it for chesed, not a contradiction.
 וכמ"ש במ"א בענין33 התכללות דשם מ"ב34 ושם ע"ב35 שהן ב' פרשיות דק"ש כו'
First parsha: 42 words, Ana B'koach also has 42, name of gvura, inyan of aliah, going up. 
Second parsha: 72 letters  - chesed (b'pashtus a different A"B than the famous chochma one, more than one thing has the gematria of 72).
First parsha speaks of chesed, v'ahavta, someone on level of tzadik. This causes gvura, a burning yearning to go up to be closer to Hashem.
Second has 72 up to and including v'samta, chesed, but the content is bad stuff that'll happen if we don't listen, talking to someone on a lower level, but the purpose of that gvura is chesed.
Sometimes we say that the first is light of gvura in vessel of chesed, sometimes the other way around, and same with second, the Tzemach Tzedek explains in Derech Mitzvosecha that a name is a m'mutza, an intermediary between a light or a vessel.


Part 7
 וכמו עקידת יצחק באברהם36 איש החסד
Avrohom was such a nice guy, how could he kill his son? Because his chesed was for Hashem, and it's not a problem for  that love for Hashem to be expressed in a gvura.
 וכתנופת הלוים שנכללו בחסדי' דכהנים
When levi'im replaced the first born in the service of the kohanim. But the kohanim are chesed, how can they be served by the levi'im, gvura?
 כמ"ש וילוו עליך37 ואיך ישרת את היפוכו וכה"ג רבים וכ"ז אינו רק מצד בחי' ההתחלקות שבכ"א ע"כ מצא מין את מינו וניעור38 
Milk in meat, botul. But if you keep on adding more drops, eventually it's not botul anymore. But it was! The new one finds it, "matza min es mino v'nayor". The levi'im have also chesed, partzuf, the Kohanim latch onto that, helps them out, and also the gvura in the kohanim helps the levi'im.
גם בהיותם ב' הפכי' ממש כו' וכמו ענין התחלקות מיכאל וגבריאל שר של אש ומים39 ואין מכבין זא"ז כמ"ש עושה השלום40 כו'
"B'miromov", in the exaulted hights, in the heavens, between these opposite angels.
 לפי שיש בכ"א מהיפוכו המנגדו דוקא
Democracy, everyone has different desires, but they can agree on an action, this guy wants it for that reason, and another guy for another reason. {Famous story of chosid simchas torah gives away mashka, all the goyim are happy and he's also happy, just a different reason.} "Hu ya'aseh sholom uleinu", make peace between us.
Peace through birur, distilling what's the goal and what's the means. The more the goal is distilled, that what we really want is to do whatever Hashem wants, the more you can see how everything in the world could be used for that goal. Than you can have peace, I want to go on mivtzoim you want to learn - what's the goal and what's the way to reach that, we can cooperate with each other.
Oseh shalom - above there's piece, the goal and means are refined. By us there isn't because it's unclear. We're asking that that clarity should reach us. V'sayn chelkenu b'torashecha - peace is through torah.
 אבל באורו' הפשוטי' בתכלית כמו בחי' הנקודות הנק' כתרים א"א להם להתכלל כלל מפני שכ"א נבדל לגמרי מזולתו ולא ימצא בו כלל מבחי' המנגדו כמו עצם בחי' הטוב שבעצמיות נפש איש הטוב הנק' עומק טוב עם עצם הרע שנק' עומק רע כו'
There's no connection between someone who's whole taanug is in good to someone who's in bad. You can maybe use the bad guy for good, but they remain with opposite goals, they can't come together. {?}
 אך בבע"ת אנו רואים שנהפך גם עצם הרע לטוב וכן זדונות עצמן נעשו כזכיות41 הרי הוא מצד מס"נ בעצמות אא"ס שלמעלה42 גם
מהתחלקות עצם החו"ג
The pleasure that a sinner has in going against Hashem's will, this that a person thinks he's his own existance, is really also a giluy, it's Hashem's power of tzimtzum that allows such a thing. So even something being against him is a giluy of him! Now, we're supposed to do mitzvos, but b'etzem, Hashem is revealed through both. The whole inyan of bad - why does it make a difference what we do? Because we matter, a Jew has a connection to Hashem. So even doing bad reveals this connection, just in a bad way. But we want this connection to be revealed in a positive way.
 ולכך יכולים במס"נ דוקא להתפלל ולומר יהי רצון בעצם מלפניך כו'
From m'sirus nefesh in kriyas sh'ma, answered in Shmone Esrei. At that level chesed and gvura same, so either can come out.


Part 8
 וכן ויעבור ה' על פניו1 כו' אל רחום להפוך גם הדין בעצם לחסד כו'
Moshe: "If not forgive, erase me from your book". Rebbe explains, if can't forgive on level of Torah, go higher than that. And Hashem said "Those who sinned, I'll erase them." Preferably, keep the rules. If not, "for those who sinned", I'll go higher, everyone's ok.
 וכמשי"ת בענין י"ג ת"ד כו' וד"ל 
Explained in chapter 25
(והיינו על ידי בחי' הקו"ח שיש בו מכח עצמות אא"ס ממש
Hashem is the one who decides to what extent revelation is drawn out from the kav in a measured, limited way. As explained earlier, that with the kav he also takes into account a giluy according to our avoda. So he can change from the usual way of things, that if we're good than there will be more giluy and bad leads to less, and go higher than the rules, to say that everything's ok. Because he made it to begin with.
 כ"ש ז"ל אליו ולא למדותיו2 גם לא למדותיו העצמיי' כו' וכמשי"ת בעזר"ה וד"ל):
The Mittler Rebbe stopped making a chapter-difference between the moshul and nimshal. So now let's take a look at that.
Hashem can reveal any light in any vessel.
	{Hiskalelus light and vessel:} Avoda of emuna: everything is for the best, if a situation looks bad it could still be good.
Everything is in Hashem's hands. Even though we have free choice. Eg if we make this incredible business deal, it's only a vessel, there's no vessel that we can make that Hashem can't turn over to be an expression of the opposite.
	Hiskallelus in the light: the desire for bad becomes overpowered by the desire for good. {See my note at beggining of part 4. That's the best I got. Lights mixing? What else could that mean?} {In my defence, there will be a bunch of chapters on lights and vessels later, 27-31 I think.}
Something looks like it's opposeing Hashem: on the level of lights and vessels, it isn't. It's metzius is taken over by the light, really it's serving it's opposite. Here, giluy so big, any opposition disapears. Earlier, we spoke about how Hashem can make  something which looks bad end up being good - but it still hurts. Here, the inyan is that even that pain is so small compared to the good that we don't even recognize it's existance. But the pain is still there.
	Hiskalelul in the etzem light: the bad actually becomes good, enjoy suffering for Hashem {Maybe like Rabbi Akiva, searching whole life to be moser nefesh.} If someone knows he's playing a game, he enjoys the challenges.
[10]Podu b'shom - redeem my soul in peace from those who battle me. Battle, but peace, when the yechida is revealed you see that the whole inyan of the opposotiion is just that there should be a challenge, avodah, so it's part of your mitzius{?}.
Before, we were saying that things which look bad are bad, but good comes from that. Now, the "bad" itself  is enjoyable. Basketball - do you enjoy winning or playing? The playing itself is  enjoyable, the difficulty is good.
A person even if he can't really be on that level should think about it. Hashem creates all existance, also bad, from nothing every moment. From that perspective, that he is making everything, everything is desired. Can't say yeridah only for aliyah, really he doesn't want the yeridah - so why'd he make it? Skip it for the aliyah! Rather, also the yeridah is good.
Goal is our avodah, when moshiach comes we'll yearn for that avodah. Tanya: benenonei should be happy with his struggle, even if he never reaches the level of tzadik; that struggle is good.
And we should have the full turning over of bad and revealing of good immidiately.