Chapter 12


Part 1
(יב) ומעתה יש להבין ביאור ענין הצמצום הראשון הנ"ל ובחי' הרשימו שנשאר כו'
really, this isn't the first tzimtzum - from kadmon to echad etc - even to get to idea of atzmus is a tzimtzum. But - all of these aren't called first because they don't relate directly to our hishtalshelus.
 הגם שידוע ליודעי' הרי יש בזה פרטים רבים
Its not such a simple thing - "light was there, and he took it out, and left it an empty place." No, its not so simple.
 וצריך להעמיק הדעת בהם ביותר
Also means have a deep sensitivity and awareness. For these two reasons {not simple, need deep feeling}, have to really study it and think about it.
 כי זהו עיקר היחוד האמיתי בעצמות אא"ס איך דכולא קמי' כלא7 כו'
1) everything is a little nothing. Like see a table - ה is hiding everything that he could do except for this table, this is nothing compared to what he could really do
2) everything here is less. "triple choclate fudge cake" - thats nothing. ה has inifinite fudge choclate cake, not just triple. And the pleasure comes from just a tiny spark of giluy elokus inside it, if you would get a full giluy it would be so pleasurable that the soul would leave the body.
3) nigleh perush, ein yakov - "Kiluh" - luh is the sun-dust from when it scrapes against its orbit. Related to the moshul that all is like light from sun, that even when you see it as its own existance, its all to reveal the etzem.
Two things - כולו קמיה כלא חשיב, and אין עוד מלבדו. First says exists, like nothing, 2nd says there is no world, and not a stira - world is just a giluy of ה, so is a metzius, a giluy of Him, but - this giluy is like nothing compared to full giluy. {so - only ה, because stuff is just a giluy, but like nothing, he is much more}
גם בבחי' כללות כל ההשתלשלות דקו וכו'
everything is like nothing - even yemos hamashiach! We don't want the giluyim, we want that we will see ה himself, אפס בלתך גואלנו לימות  המשיח ואין דומה לך מושיענו בתחיית המתים - all this stuff is worthless without ה. When a person realizes that all this stuff is mamesh nothing, and the whole inyun is what is behind it they won't be interested in the external thing, they'll want only ה.  Its like if someone gives you a check - you don't care about the check, you want the money which is backing it which is in the other guy's bank account. Or a dollar - the actual thing itself {the raw material} is worth something, but you want more than that. Also this world - its a check for the infinite, and we should cash it.


Part 2
 עד שיוכל אדם לכוון רצונו במס"נ לעצמות אא"ס לבדו
through a proper understanding of the tzimtzum, a person can streighten out his desire, look past all the random stuff, and see that עאא"ס is it, and he would give up anything to connect to ה himself.
Moshul of king, opens his treasure house but sets up all sorts of distractions around, people forget about the עיקר. Also here - all kinds of physical and spiritual distractions, we have to go for the עוקר, Hashem himself.
Meaning לכוון: to direct, streight, like a laser pointer, or like getting sights on a gun lined up properly.  When a person understands the tzimtzum he can properly line up his רצון. 
 כמ"ש אתה הוא ה' לבדך8
there is nothing else
 אתה כו'
everything bows to you.
So - exists {implied if bowing, that exists but בטול}or not? Same explanation as before, exists, but as giluy, עיי"ש
 וזהו המלך המרומם לבדו בחי' מל' דא"ס שלפני הצמצום שמתנשא גם מימות עולם דא"ק9
transcends A"K, even the idea of Moshiach, where A"K is like the final goal of everything, which is when Moshiach comes, ה is above even that.
 שנקרא ימי קדם הנ"ל
{Malchus of א"ס here is referred to as ימי קדם. Can't say that שנקרא is reffering to A"K, because very clear in previous phrase that A"K is reffering to ימות עולם} Usually this phrase refers to A"K, but here kadmon. ימות עולם means the normal way and limitations of whatever level you're talking about, and ימי קדם is how this giluy is preceded in the etzem, which does not have limitations.
 וזהו השמים בחי' סובב הכללי שאחר הצמצום ושמי השמים שלפני הצמצום לא יכלכלוך10 גם בבחי' כלי לכלי כמו גליף גליפו בטה"ע כו' וד"ל
If engrave letters in diamond, can't read it, because theres not enough contrast. So stamp it into wax. Nimshal- letters of kadmon are still hidden, after tzimtzum like stamped on wax, then you can see the letters. 
So - גליף גליפו -we have an engraving for an engraving. And לא יכלכלוך, this can not grasp him, not even in a way of a vessel for a vessel. But - if he decides to reveal himself through it, then the whole essence is there. But nothing can capture him in and of itself. You have to connect to him directly, and then you can see how he is revealed in all this other stuff. But just with the stuff? Not going to work so well. {This idea is explained more at length at the end of Part 5.}
 וכמ"ש מי לי בשמים11 שהוא גם בחי' סובב הכללי שלפני הצמצום שנק' שמי השמים12 כו' ועמך לא חפצתי בארץ בבחי' קו"ח בחי' ממלא הכללי כו'.
Alter Rebbe would say "I don't want... I want you". Then in later years that he would say that he has all these gilluyim, and he'll have mesirus nefesh that the davening of a simple jew should be accepted like a tzaddik gamur on Rosh Hashana. Maybe the inyan is like what it says in HaYom Yom, that more then loving ה is loving who he loves, because your own loving could be a selfish thing. You want he should be good to his people.


Part 3
 והנה יש כמה אופנים במשלי' שונים להשכיל ביאור ענין הצמצום הנק' מק"פ כידוע למעיין
Someone who is not a m'ayen doesn't need diffrent ways, in general its a very simple thing. But a m'ayen needs more stuff to work with.
 וכללותו עולה בסגנון א' והוא כדי שיוכל להיות אא"ס בבחי' השפעה בצמצום בבחי' קו הוצרך לצמצם עצמו' אורו שישאר בהעלם בעצמותו כו' ולא יאיר כולו רק אפס קצהו בלבד כדי שיהי' אח"כ המשכות האור בדילוג הערך
Now for the first and main moshul, rav and talmid
 וה"ז כמשל אור שכל עמוק ורחב שבעצמות המשפיע שכדי שיומשך ממנו למקבל הבלתי ערך אליו הוצרך המשפיע להעלים בעצמו כל עומק השגתו ולא ישאר רק בחי' רושם כנקודה א' מכל העומק והרוחב
Has to conceal everything, the only thing he'll reveal is one tiny point.
Like a great mathamatician who is going to teach a little kid math. He can't go on about calculus and trig - he has to work with one point , e.g. 1+1=2. (And really even that is to abstract, he needs to say "1 fishy + 1 fishy = 2 fishies". But thats later on. 1+1=2 is talking about the one point which he'll try to give over.)
 ולא שנסתלק ונתעלם לגמרי
He isn't missing the width and depth {the teacher didn't forget it}
 רק כמו השונ' בדרך קצר' שכל העומק ורוחב הפלפול ישנו בשכלו רק שהוא נכלל לפי שעה בהעלם עצמותו בשעה שאומר הדין דרך קיצור ומיד שישאלוהו ירחיב הדבר כו' רק בשביל שיובן למקבל דרך זה הקצר מעלים גם בעצמו לפי שעה כו'
He gives only a little bit, and even within himself he only focuses on this small thing. Like ask a rov a question - if he gives the whole answer, the sha"ch says this and the ta"z says that, its great - but... the mikabel won't get anything. The rov has to distill it to one simple point.
 וכמ"ש במ"א באריכות13 ומה שנשאר כמו נקוד' שהוא דרך קצר' אין זה צמצום גמור ואמיתי כמו המצמצם ומעלי' לגמרי שנחסר למקבל לגמרי
For example, if the teacher would decide that he's not going to teach this idea - now its a complete, true concealment. Over here though, he wants to explain it - and this is the only way to go about it.

 אלא הענין הוא שכולל בדרך קצר זה כל האריכות לא יחסר דבר וחצי דבר כמו שכלול בדין הקצר שבמשנ' כל האריכות הפלפול שבגמרא


Part 4
 וכמו שלא נעלם ליודע כל הפלפול גם בשעה ששונה לעצמו דרך קיצור כו' שנמצא שידיעתו באריכות מקפת בהעלם כל התגלות הקיצור ולא שנסתלק לגמרי כשכחה וכה"ג כו'
He knows the whole idea, and sees it in this explanation
 וכמ"ש ביאור זה באריכות במ"א14.
Need the tzimtzum, but not k'pshuto, even when the teacher gives over one small point, the whole idea is not really concealed,
1)  from him 
	a) The teacher didn't forget it, and when he's asked for more of the whole idea he can say it immidiately
	b) He sees how this short explanation that he gave really contains everything (כדין קצר שבמשנה)
2) or from the student
	a) Even though the teacher only gives the student a little bit, he's not trying to conceal. Its according to the level of the student - when he's ready for more, the teacher will give him more. 
	b) And even in the limited explanation that he gets - really in that also is found everything.
So - from the perspective of the teacher and the student, both have it. The only thing is that because of the limited level of the student he doesn't see a large portion of the idea, its hidden. But its there.
This is the first main moshul.
 ואופן משל הב' מחיות הנפש בגוף
This is the second main moshul
 ג"כ עול' ע"ד הנ"ל והוא בהיות שכדי שישתנה מחיי רוחני' שבעצם הנפש לחיי בשר הוצרך להיות בחי' העלם וכיווץ האור של הנפש בתחל'
	Like we said by teacher, has to limit the idea so that the student can use it - also the soul: To come into the body, has to hide its full potential. Because it can do a lot more then the body, see more hear more etc. But right now we don't want an unlimited power of sight, to see everything that is and throw a few hallucinations on top of it of things that aren't. We only want the soul to see what the eyes see.
	For example, sometimes sitting in class, unstead of seeing and hearing the teacher, a person's mind can wander off and now he's seeing and hearing something totally different. And that example is just creating images from the brain unstead of the eyes - the souls ability to percive is even more unlimited. But we want the soul to keep quiet, and only see what the eye sees.
	So when the soul comes in, it accepts this limitation automaticaly, because its trying to be inside the body. But a person can try to go out of the body, and leave a little bit.
	One time, the Rebbe Rashab was saying a maamer, and someone was speaking in a nearby room, so without neccesarily conciously deciding to, he removed his soul from the ear closer to the source of the disturbance.
	Or like a nevua, that most נביאים would totally lose their sences, fall on the ground, etc, because the soul was going out of the body a little bit. For it to come in, has to limit itself.
 לפי שאין ערך ביניהם 
The body is too small, so the soul has to limit
ועכ"ז הרי מתפעל' הנפש ממקרי הגוף
Its not like a little ray goes into the body, but the soul remains aloof and removed from the whole business. Yes, its only a limited ray, but the whole soul is attached to it.
 א"כ גם אור הגשמ' החיות תתחבר ונקשר אל אור עצמותה הרוחני
Even the little glimmer of the soul that percives is connected to the essential light of the soul. So if someone is hit or insulted, it effects that even their soul is pained by what happens. Its not just their body, the whole soul feels it. {And in general - the body doesn't feel, the soul feels. The body has chemicals running around, eardrums shaking - but its the soul the sees and feels etc.} And also with happiness.
 כצמיחה גשמי' שנקשר בכח הצומח הרוחני כו'
Huge potential of earth to grow causes one tiny plant to pop up somewhere. And even this tiny stem takes through the roots, which only take certain nutrients, which is why farmers rotate crops, according to what the plant is. Basicaly, it gets just a tiny nothing of a giluy. But if you disconnect it from its source, its not going to grow anymore, so its apparent that it needs this connection to the whole power of growth. {But a potted plant, disconnected from the ground, would seem to be disconnected from the infinite power of growth? יש לומר that even a small amount of soil, e.g. a potted plant, has an unlimited power of growth. And the plant which grows only takes a tiny part of that, a portion so insignificant that it can barely be said to exist. But at the same time, it has to be connected to this soil, to this infinite potential of growth, or else it won't grow. Hydroponics? Ask your local orthodox kabbalist.} Also soul in body- if the whole soul wasn't there, the person wouldn't be alive.


Part 5
Before we said that the whole thing is there despite the tzimtzum. Now he says the other side.
 ובהחתך אבר הגוף לא יחסר באור וחיות רוחניות של אבר זה
even though its there, its not trapped there, so hurting the body will not harm the soul
 וראי' מסומא שמוליד שלם כו' כידוע
We have children that are like us. If being/becoming blind meant that this power was gone, so his children would have to be blind to be similar to him. And also physically - its still in the DNA, this potential just has to be revealed.
And even if the DNA becomes messed up - there was an expirement where they tried making flies without wings. The generations' wings would get smaller and smaller - but then in one or two generations it would be right back to normal flies. Because the soul pushes a certain form.
 אין זה רק שהרוחניות הוא בהעלם וישנו במציאותו
in its complete existence.
 חופף על חיות הגשמי שבגוף ונק' צלם איש כו'
you see this kind of in a "phantom limb", that they could still have this perception.
 והיינו ע"ד הנ"ל בידיע' שבהעלם כו'
that really the teacher and the student have everything, also in the soul and body they both continue to have the whole thing {even if someone loses a limb ח"ו}, just that to the body its not revealed {Just like the whole idea is in the kitzur, but its גלוי is lacking to the student according to how limited his ability is, so to the whole soul is in the body, but the גלוי in the body is לפי the כלי}. And more - just like the student can reveal the whole idea, also the body can reveal the entire soul, after its purified a bit, when Moshiach comes. Whereas now - thats where death comes in, that the soul doesn't love being here so much because it can't express its whole being, so things go down hill. But if its whole ratzon was to be here, then even from one limb it could grow the entire body, like luz bone, or like we see with a baby, that from one or two cells grows this entire person.
 (וכ"ז מבואר באריכות במ"א)
These were the two main mesholim, now we're quickly going to run through a few more.
 וכן כח התנוע' הרוחניות כשבא' בתנועת הגשם מתצמצמת בעצמותה כו' 
it can make any sort of movement, and now its just making this one silly little thing - this is a tremendous limitation.
ועכ"ז התנוע' גשמית מחוברת ומקושרת בתנוע' הרוחנית
The physical movement has to be connected to the spiritual power, or else couldn't move. "Dead dogs don't bark." The whole soul has to be there for even this one limited movement, but this movement doesn't capture the soul. Moving the body doesn't make it alive.
 וכה"ג באופני' אחרים כמו ענין התחכמות שכל פרטי מכח המשכיל שלו ששור' עליו בהעלם כו'.
His whole genuis is being expressed in this one idea, but this idea doesn't capture his whole genuis. If he wasn't so smart, he wouldn't be able to come up with this idea. But even if you understand this idea, that won't make you as smart as him.
He has to limit his intellect to come up with this idea, but he could still come up with any other idea. And you see this potential even when you see this one idea. And even more then that - if you'll really learn this idea, it'll make you smart in a similar way to him. אותיות הרב, that how he said it, the letters, contain his way of thinking.
Sechel of mishna is totally beyond us. So - "study 100 times, the malach of the mishna will teach it to you". פירוש, that when you go over the ideas again and again it sets up your brain for those ideas. And thats really with anything - it is stated that if you learn a maamer 60 times, you get the etzem.


Part 6
Before, the Mittler rebbe discussed the tzimtzum
1)main moshul from teacher, he has to put aside all of his understanding and just leave a little bit, כנ"ל
	A) Teacher - doesn't forget, and sees the whole idea as it is on his level in the explanation that he gives
	B) Student - recieves everything, just doesn't realize it.
2) Soul going into body
	The essence of the soul is connected to body, therfore effected, but if body hurt doesn't subtract from soul
Now, he discusses the reshimo
 ואמנם להבין בחי' הרשימו
Simple meaning is impression, like write phone number on notebook and remove that paper - on the papers behind, an impression remains of the numbers from when the writer pressed down with the pencil.
Not a residue - rather, the original thing is completely gone, but you can know about it from something over here. Like a foot print.
 שענינ' מורה בחי' הסתלקות בהעלם
removed to be hidden
 ולא נשאר מהכל רק רושם כו' הוא מובן יותר מעניני' משלים אחרים1 כמו הרושם שעוש' האומן2
Its not a drawing, rather like a code with lines and symbols - to a normal person would be completely meaningless, but to the one who made it all the information that he needs is there.
 שיוכל לעשות הבנין בקיצור קו זה שברושם שכולל כל אריכות המעש' בקיצור רושם זה
Theres no instructions or pictures or explanations. The mishna relates to what the gemara talks about, it just says less. If you read it even without any explanation, you'll get an idea of whats going on. But the blueprint - if you don't have someone explaining it to you, youre never going to get it. The intellect is completely hidden, even though its all there.
או כמו שעוש' לזכרון הנק' אות 
e.g. if he ties a string around his finger to make him remember something. The string has no connection to the idea, if someone else sees it he won't have any idea what its there for, no matter how much he studies it.
שאין האות ענין שייך אל עצם הענין רק לזכרון בעלמא כמו עשה לך ציונים3 כו'
Tziyunim - mneunomic, like roygbiv for colors of the rainbow - know one can look at that and figure out what it is
 וזהו בחי' העלם יותר מקיצור ההלכה ששונה וכולל בו הכל שעכ"פ שייך ענין הקיצור אל האריכות 
{Greater concealment}
ויש עוד אופן ברשימו זו שהוא מורה ענין הצמצום וההעלם הרבה יותר והוא כמו הזורק אבן שכח המוליך אותו נבדל מן העצם
You can't see who threw it, and the thrower can rest after its thrown even though its still flying - because they're seperate.
 ועכ"ז כל כח התנוע' מלובש בו בהעלם 
and even his essence is there, if he causes damage or kills - he could be killed, because he is responsible for what happens.
אך שהוא בריחוק נבדל ביותר מכחו העצמי שבידו משא"כ כח התנוע' עצמה שמניעה בעצמו בגשם שמלובש בגלוי בגשם ביותר כנ"ל
This idea, of distance, that you can take the thing and go, is in all the mesholim - if you have the blueprint, you can build the building, with or without the architecht.
{Greater concealment}
 ויש בחי' העלם יותר גם מזה שדומה לענין הרושם לזכרון לבד והוא כמו הרומז בידו לאיזה שכל עמוק ביותר שנבדל תנועה גשמי' מהשכל הרוחני ועכ"ז מבין השכל מתוכו כו' 
For example, the Rebbe waving his arm to encourage a niggun, etc.
{Greater concealment}
ויותר מזה העלם אור השכל בתנוע' האצבע בכתיבתו אותו וכמ"ש במ"א באריכות והכל עולה לסגנון א' הנ"ל שבחי' העצמות נשאר בהעלם וכלול ברושם ונקודה זו כו' וד"ל:
These 6 misholim aren't the same - in עת"ר the Rebbe Rashab explains the diffrence. In general, each one shows on a greater state of hiddenness {according to the 4 worlds}.
The earlier misholim show 1) the idea is completely hidden 2) becomes seemingly seperate.
The last, of writing, נראה לי {Rabbi Walters} that this is an introduction to the kav, like how the moshul from the power of growth in the earth brought down in the end of פרקים ten and eleven  introduces from before tzimtzum to tzimtzum. We'll ask in Chapter 14 "If its completely hidden, how can we get it out?" We see in the analogy of writing that the intellect is completely hidden, but when it comes into the paper - its revealed! {So there is an שייכות to giluy in reshimu, the details of which will be explained}
