1)What is א"ס in the moshul? Based on a more thorough understanding of that, can we understand why can't we speak about anything over there? The sefiros in yachid, as well as echad and kadmon (see question 3) all don't really exist - why can't we put them in א"ס?
2)What is this אא"ס, in the moshul? You say in the shiur that its a giluy of himself, to himself, exactly as he is. So- this would be an awareness of self? That before the tzimtzum there was ה and he had an awareness of himself, and we refer to self-awareness as אא"ס? And this doesn't contradict the unity and simplicity of Hashem?
3)In your shiur the different levels seem to have a certain separateness. Rabbi Markel often emphasizes how none of these levels actually exist. Can you explain this matter?

An understanding that I have now is within the essence of the person (א"ס?)  - completely concealed, nothing to talk about. (needs biur maybe a little bit). But in his knowledge of himself - the essence of that (yachid) is the essence of the gilluyim, which is him, כמבואר, but to be revealed first there is a theoretical giluy of sefiros as an independent thing - not in an actual way, but he can be מגלה himself in a way of chessed, until eventually (kadmon) theres an idea that he can reveal himself in a particular measured way. And when he actually reveals himself, it passes through in a theoretical way the two levels of echad and kadmon...

Is this whole thing (my question and kind of answer) totally out to lunch? kind of in the right direction? Deeply saddening? (I know when I try to explain something to someone and then they say "you mean..." and proceed to say the complete opposite of what I said its very weakening). If this whole thing sounds like a poorly thought out ramble, feel free to say so. If you want to send me a maamer I should look at, thats also cool.

Kol tuv, and gut yomtov!

Sent from the holy city of Tzfas.

PS attached you will find some kinda transcript stuff, as promised in the subject. Has someone else done this already? What do you think about it? The encoding is UTF-8, windows line ending.
