B"H

Hi Yehuda,

It is good to hear from you. Good Yom Tov, and Lishana Tova Bilimud Hachassidus Ubedarchei Hachassidus Tikaseivu Viseichaseimu!

You ask very good questions and they are not easy to explain in writing, but I will try to give you something to point you in the right direction. As far as a maamar to learn, I would learn Kuntres Inyono Shel Toras Hachassidus. The explanation he gives there about Yechida correspond to the Ein Sof.

The main purpose of learning about the seder hishtalshellus is to understand etzem. First to be able to distinguish the etzem in its pure state, separate from any non-essential form. Then, the goal is to see how this essence remains and is found in every stage of hishtalshellus, in all of the forms and giluyim. In other words, we want to acheive a giluy of the etzem.

Everything in the world has many external, circumstantial details that cover the etzem. For example, in order for a cup to exist it must be made of a certain material, have a certain size, weight, color, etc. Non of these are essential to the cup--the cup can be made out of anything and in many sizes and shapes. Yet, we can never see the pure essence of cup directly, but only as it is revealed in specific instances of various cups. Our mind, however, can separate the details that change from the essence that remains constant.

The main moshul for the Ein Sof is a person's Yechida--his inner self. The person is not defined by his expression in the lower soul levels (נרנ"ח) in intellect and emotions and actions. I am not the sum of those parts (intellect, emotions, etc.), but something higher that is expressed through them. I can't know anything about even my own essence (that is why this level is called רדל"א, it doesn't even know itself), only:
0. that it exists and 
1. that it is is beyond any particular form, 
2. it pervades every self-expression, and
3. it is found in the core of every self expression.

The unknowable essence itself is the moshel for the Ein Sof
The three ways that this essence relates to my self-expressions in various forms (1,2, and 3) correspond to the Ohr Ein Sof, specifically Yachid, Echad, and Kadmoan.
When something possesses all three of these characteristics together, this proves that it is an etzem, therefore, these are the light or revelation of the etzem.

Yet, although the soul possesses the ability to create intellect and emotions and actions, the ability and potential for these exist as a higher order of existence that automatically includes infinite potential for these lower forms of existence. For example, the soul's power of creative choice includes the potential for all expressions in a single higher power (this is Yachid), yet even this power does not capture the entire essence, but only the potential of the essence to interact in a world and to express itself.

Therefore, we compare these to the light of the sun. The sun itself is not made out of light, but a ball of gas. Yet, this gas does possess the potential to create light. This potential is not the entire essence, and even this potential is not actual light at all. Yet, the sun, because of its nature, can produce all of the various colors of light that we see.

So too, in the nimshal. G-d is not intellect, or creations, or love, or life, or energy, or the laws of nature, or even the ability to create these things. He is a completely higher essence. Yet, because of the nature and quality of His Essence He does possess the ability to create all of these things. Yet, none of these express His entire Essence or even more of His Essence than any other thing. On the other hand, every detail of creation is an example of His Essence revealed and contains His entire Essence at its core.

I think the key is to understand the relationship between essence and revelation explained in Kuntres Inyono, and the three symptoms of essence explained there.

Let me know if this helps!

Also, the main thing that will help you understand this is having mesiras nefesh for ahavas yisrael. By learning to see past people's external selves and differences and appreciate their G-dly essence and love them and help them reveal that inner self (including yourself), this idea will become very clear. You need to be in touch with your self and realize that you are a piece of G-d that is beyond any talents or choices you make. 

Another maamar that helps with this is Yafa Shaah Achas from kuntreisim of the Mitteler Rebbe. There he walks you through the process of pealing back the layers to find your essence and then reveal it back in your life. I am attaching a translation of the maamar in case you are interested.

Kol Tuv,

Benyomin Walters
